Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Thus begin the words of Albucasim.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	O children, now that I have completed this book for you, which is the last of the science of medicine and from whose completion through its expositions and declarations I have seen that you will reach the end of it, and by means of which, it is to me clear that you will reach it through this treatise, which is a part of the action with the hand, that is surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	For the action with the hand is now prohibited in our realm and in our times deprived of it, while greatly threatening the science of medicine; and its practices are obscured and only a few small descriptions remain of them in the books of the ancients, which they have altered and introduced into errors and delusions, closing their minds to it, lengthening their words, and losing the art.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And it has seemed good to me that you animate this through the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and so that it may come with the forms of the instruments of cautery and of the other instruments of the work as they are through addition of declaration, and through preparation of it, which cause is necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	But the cause for which no good artist is found with his hand in our time is because the art of medicine is long, and that it requires its practitioner to be exercised beforehand in the science of anatomy, which understands the joints of the members and their forms, and the conjunction and separation of them; and has knowledge of the bones, the nerves, and the veins, and the places of their origin.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And because of this, Hippocrates says that by name it is much, but in work little, and especially in the art of the hand.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	But we have already spoken of that in the introduction to this book; for whoever is not knowledgeable of what we have told you of anatomy, it is not vacated that he will not fall into error by which men will die, as I have seen many of those, for some are formed in this science and they throw themselves from it without science or experience.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	For I have seen an old and experienced physician open a scrofulous abscess on the neck of a woman, and cut certain arteries in her neck so that much blood flowed, causing the woman to die under his hands.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And I have seen another physician who, after he had extracted a stone from a man that was large, and came to him and drew out that stone with a piece of the bladder, causing that man on the third day to die.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And I have called it to be extracted before, and I saw by the size of the stone and the disposition of the patient that he would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And I have seen another physician who took a stipend from a duke of our land for surgery, and he treated a black slave who had a fracture in his thigh; and the physician, through his ignorance, drew out the fracture above the plague with powder and bandages with great tightness, and did not leave the wound to breathe.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And then he closed it according to his wishes, and bound it up, and let it lie for several days and commanded that we not loosen the bandage; and so it went as the thigh and the foot became pustular, and he came to perdition.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And I was called to him, and prepared to loosen the bandage, and tranquility came upon him and he ceased from his pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	But indeed corruption had been confirmed in the member, so that I could not restrain it, and the corruption did not cease to wander about the member as the patient perished.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And I have seen another physician who opened a cancerous ulcer and it was inflamed after several days, as the malice of it grew great with its lord.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The cause of which is that the cold humor is pure, and it does not come to it with fire at all, but that there be a member which suffers that from everything it becomes hostile.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And because of this, children, it is necessary for you that the action with the hand be divided into two duties: one in operation that is associated with health, and in work in which there is peril in the greatest dispositions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And I have already touched on that in every place of this book in which occurs operation in which there is error and fear; so that it is necessary for you to keep to that and leave that aside, so that the unlearned do not find a way to speak and to reproach you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And therefore take your arms with diligence and the protection of God, and your patients with facility and firmness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best way by the grace of God that they may attain health and laudable success, and lay aside the terrible maladies of difficult cure, and display your arms against what makes you afraid, so that idleness in your faith and in your name does not vanquish you; for more remains to your glory, and beyond all in the realm and in the world to your sanctities.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Gauliah has already said in some of his books:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	“Do not treat bad maladies poorly, so that bad physicians are not named.”
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And I have divided this book according to three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	The division of the book begins, and first of the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter ordered of the head, in the forms of the instruments and of the tools of cauteries, and of what is necessary in the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter, of cauterization and puncturing, and of cupping-glasses, and of plasters, and of extraction of thorns and the like; all chapters and ordered of the forms of the instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	Division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, of restoration and of dislocation, and of cure of torture and of the like; a chapter ordered of the head, in the forms of the instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	Of cautery with fire and with acute medicine and remembrance of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	With that begins the treatise of all the book.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	I will say what the quality of the humors of that cautery and of the pain of it are, and in what condition cautery is prohibited.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore I say that the speech of the quality of the humor of cautery and of the pain of it is long and prolix, and subtle by science, and a secret hidden; and many wise men have spoken greatly of it, and they are disagreed among themselves, and for me a little of their speeches suffices, fearing prolixity.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And therefore I say that cautery confers universally upon every complexional matter, excepting two complexions which are complexional without matter.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the complexional and dry matter they disagreed; for some said that cautery is beneficial to it, and the others said the contrary of that, that cautery is not convenient in disease which is by quality and dryness, for the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inconvenient that the disease which is complexional and dry with what is cauterized and dry be healed.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And I say the contrary of that, that by cautery there is made humor in every disease which is complexional and dry that you see in men's bodies, for when you compare man's body to the complexions of fire, you moisten man's body.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I say by that speech that experiment that which I have discovered several times.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	But indeed no one should venture upon this topic unless he is experienced and practiced in the chapter of cauterization through subsequent exercise, and has come to know the diversity of human complexions and the disposition of illnesses in their bodies, and the causes of these, and their accidents, and the span of time of these.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	But in the other complexions, there is no reason for fear, and especially in the moist and friction-based illnesses, for all doctors have agreed upon these, and are not disagreeing about the use of cauterization in them.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And know, children, that the secret of healing through cauterization with fire and the goodness of it is that fire is simple, the action of which does not spread except to the member which is cauterized, and does not affect another member joined to it, except with minor harm.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	But the action of burning medicine spreads to other members that are joined to it, and strongly brings about a difficult-to-heal illness in them, and strongly hurts.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	But fire, by its subtlety and the goodness of its substance, does not do that except that it expels what is superfluous; and it has been known to us through experience and through long service of study of the truth of causes. And because of this I am excused from the length of speech; and if it were not that I did not have my free will in this pause, hidden from you a secret with fire, and the quality of its action in bodies and of its expulsion by which illnesses are expelled, demonstrated with philosophical speech, which would be acute for you.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And know, children, that they disagree on the time when cauterization is convenient, and pause the best time of spring.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And I say that cauterization is convenient in all times, so that the harm from the accidental time is submerged by what is drawn out by cauterization; and especially if the cauterization is for pains or necessary pains, strong and violent, which do not endure delay because of what is feared to come from them, a maliciousness that is greater than minor harm.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And therefore do not fear in your hearts, O children, that this is not believed except by the common people and foolish doctors; for with that illness which is healed by cauterization there is not a reason to pause at all times, but they pause at what follows.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the cause is not as they think, for cauterization is only in place of medicine which alters the complexion and dries out the moistnesses that are the cause by which pains come.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	But cauterization is superfluous over medicine because of the willfulness of its strength and power of its action, and the greatness of its lord.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	And it is possible for his illness to return at some time of the year, according to the complexion of the patient and the location of his illness, and the power of it, and what is prepared in his body from the accumulation of superfluities within him, and what is received by him in acquisition from foods and likenesses of those causes; unless the illness for which cauterization was administered is a subtle illness in a member with few superfluities and moistnesses, as with a toothache and its likeness, it is possible that this pain will not return to him but rather what happens to him is minor.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	And it is a common saying that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine, and it is a true saying, not so that they understand it in it, for they believe that there is no healing that profits from medicine or other cause except cauterization.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the cause is contrary to that; and the intention that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine is only when we administer methods of healing in some illnesses, and those medicines do not confer, and especially at the end of the cause we administer to them cauterization, and profit from it.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And therefore we have that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine, not according to the intention which the common people and foolish doctors understand it.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And the ancients said that cauterization with gold is better than cauterization with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and the subtlety of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they said that the location of cauterization does not matter, when it is not absolutely true, for I have seen and proven that it only matters in some bodies and not in others; but when you do cauterization with fire with gold, it is not declared to you because it is heated according to the amount that you want by the heat of the gold, and because it prepares itself to receive friction; and if you place over it ignition, it melts into the fire some leaves through which the artisan cuts for the occupation of that.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And because of this, cauterization is done with iron more lightly and more closely to correctness of action.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have already ordered this chapter on cauterization according to chapters, and I have ordered those of the head among the feet, so that elsewhere you may demand from it what you want.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	Of cauterization of headache from coldness and moisture.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cauterization confers to moisture and coldness the serving accident of which there are two causes; it is a cause of soda and multitude of fluxes, called corissa, from the parts of the ears and from the nose flowing, and multitude of sleeping, and of toothache and of the jaw, and universally of all illnesses that come through frigidity, as with paralysis and apoplexy, and their likeness in those illnesses.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cauterization is this: first, you command the patient to be evacuated by laxative medicine, the head being washed out, for three or four days, according to the power of the patient and his age and habit.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then command that he wash his head with soap, and then rest between your knees on a low bench and place his hands over his feet.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then pause the edge of your palm, and then press upon the edge of his nose between his eyebrows.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	But indeed, when your middle finger is arrived at that place, mark it with your tent, and then ignite the cauterization olive of which this is the form:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And then place it upon the place marked with your tent, in such a way that it descends, and your hand be cramped little by little, and you revolve it.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And then lift your hand lightly and look at the place; and if you see that there has been discovered some amount of the head, as though the quantity of hair, then lift your hand again, and if it does not return with that iron, with another, if it is cooled off, between while it is seen by you what I have said to you.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then take a little salt and dissolve that over the place and let it be for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then place on it wool that is saturated in vinegar and let it be upon it while the scar of the fire is destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And then heal the place with tetramedicament within while it is healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And they said that when Roman plaster is opened up, then the greater number of blisters it has, for it is better and more healing.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And they said that some of them that the tendon be cauterized within the bone, and have the cauterization within while some part of the tissue of the bone is burned.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And then it should be cut where it adheres to the bone, and then treated.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And others said that with the cautery they reached the nerve, which presses strongly on the bone, and this is the form of the small alpecat:
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And they believe that from that place the vapors of the head escape.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And if the wound has been open for a long time, it should be treated and allowed to heal over time.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	But I have not seen these two types of cautery at all, except in a few cases due to fear; and I think that leaving it as it is better for health than removing it, because the head is delicate due to the continuity of its veins, as we have testified in other members, and especially when the patient's head is of a frail nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the first type of cautery is safer and better in my opinion; and using it and performing that operation is healthier.
Capitol segon.	Chapter Two:
Del cauteri del cap.	Of cauterization of the head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When in the whole head there is a chronic and long-lasting pain which is prolonged in the patient, and he uses leeches and cupping glasses and caputal poultices and plasters and guaiac wood and similar things, and especially if he has already been cauterized with a cautery which does not help him for any of these causes, then consider that if the patient's head is of strong creation in its nature, and not frail and finds great discomfort, then cauterize it again with another cautery after the first one.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	Then cauterize it on the crown of his head with a cautery so that the vein is cut.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Having cut the vein and discovered it from the bone to the extent that we have mentioned, cauterize it with a cautery at the back of the head in the place which is called the windpipe, — and this is the place where the cupping glass is applied.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And hold your hand over it, and do not uncover the bone, because the patient experiences great discomfort from this compared to all other cauteries of the head.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And I say this cautery in its place, because the cautery with which you cauterize the horns of the head and the occipital is a more subtle cautery than that with which the middle of the head is cauterized; and this is how it is done.
Capitol ters.	Chapter Three:
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	Of cauterization for non-ancient emigration.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When there is a sudden pain in the front of the head or an aching pain that extends to the eye, evacuate the head with purgatives, and administer the other treatment which I have described in the causes of diseases; and if this does not help, cauterization can be performed in two ways: either with an acute burning medicine or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	But a cautery with a burning medicine is that you take a piece of wool, scorch it and put the ends of it on both sides of the head.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	Then pierce the location of the pain in the temple with a small lance inserted so that it is under the vein and hidden.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	Then tie it tightly with a descent constriction, and leave it there for the space of three hours; then remove the wool and treat the lance-wound, and leave the wound for two or three days, and then apply cold water to the spot until it heals over.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then treat it with an ointment so that it heals.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you wish, do this with some burning medicines which I have written about in the two treatises on burning medicines.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	But cauterization with iron is done like this: heat the cautery of which this is the form:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	and it is called a closed claw nail, because the head of it is shaped like a claw with some curvature, and in the middle of it there is a small projection.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	Then apply it to the location of the pain, and hold your hand — so that the cautery is not burnt — and move the iron little by little with speed.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the quantity of it that is burnt by the specifcality of the vein is equal to the thickness of it, and raise your hand so that the artery is not burnt which is underneath, so that there is no flow of blood.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then wet a cloth in salt water and apply it to the spot, and leave it for three days; then apply cold water to it, and treat it with an ointment so that it heals.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you wish, cauterize with the tip of the scalpel according to cautery, and be careful not to cut the artery in this non-ancient emigration.
Capitol quart.	Chapter Four:
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	Of cauterization for ancient emigration.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you are treating emigration with what we have said about the previous cure, and what we have said in the divisions of the diseases, and the cure does not help, and you see that it does not suffice for the disease which is not abated by what we have said about the first cautery with medicine or the cautery with fire, then wherever you ignite the cautery cuttler so that it turns white, press it onto the location of the pain with a line of length equal to the thickness of the tip, or longer; and holding your hand so that the cautery does not burn the artery underneath it.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, it is necessary for you to be careful about the continuity of the mandible which is damaged due to chewing, and that the joint not be burnt and the nerve underneath it, and that there be no cramp.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it is about guarding against the flow of blood from the artery which is abscised, because there is danger in its abscision, and especially to one who does not know what he is doing and is unskilled; and let the operation begin in that place.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And I will come with remembrance of the regime for accidental flow of blood from the artery according to its own way, in your free time.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see that this disease does not suffice to this cautery and the patient's body is tolerable, cauterize it in the middle of the head as we have mentioned, and treat the wound so that it heals.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you wish, administer the cautery which we have mentioned in the chapter on contraction of the artery with cautery having two tips, and this cauterization is better and more effective.
Capitol .v.	Chapter Five:
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	Of cauterization for pains in the ears.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When there is pain in the ear caused by cold and it is treated with caustic causes and with the other cure which I have mentioned in the division, and the pain is not eased, then ignite the cautery, and this is the one which is called puncta, of which this is the form:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	Then pierce it with the cautery and ignite it, and let it be held in the environment of the entire ear as it is rotated, or in the circuit of either side if the pain is in either side.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Move around with the cautery from the root of the ear a little at a time so that it touches the spot with effort.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the cautery of ten points in the entire ear, and those around it, and then treat the spots so that they heal.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter Six:
De cauterizacio de turtura.	Of cauterization for torture.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	Torture which is cured and treated with cauterization is nothing but the spices which come through phlegm, according to what we have said in the divisions of the diseases.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cauterization of the area that is affected by dryness or by a nerve spasm.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you are treating this type of torture with leeches and bloodletting and poultices, and your treatment is not working, then you must cauterize the patient in three places: first, at the root of the ear; second, a little below his temple; and third, at the junction of two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And apply your cautery opposite to the affected area, because softening will not occur except in the part that is not healing.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	And the method of cauterization is that you cauterize it with the cautery on the right side of the upper part of the ear, a little above the corner of the head; and in the temple another one, the length of which should be according to the length of the little finger, and apply your hand with the cautery until half of the quantity of the size of a barleycorn is burned.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the form of the cautery, and it is a tool of the surgeon, the shape of which is described below.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	But indeed more subtle is that one little bit as you see; and if it has some superficial hardness, cut a little.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the area with what is described in front of you until it is healed.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter 7
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	On cauterization for ancient apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is ancient and you are treating it with what we have said and your treatment is not working and the patient does not have a fever, then cauterize him with four cauteries: over all the corners of his head; and with cautery on the middle part of his head, as we have said; and with cautery in the neck.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the manner of the cautery is done according to what has been said above.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And he has already been cauterized over the mouth of the stomach; and it is more effective in the rear; and then let it be treated with what comes out.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 8
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	On cauterization for obliteration caused by phlegm.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	Let the patient be given at the beginning large leeches and purifying pills by the servant.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	And then shave the whole head of the patient and apply to his neck the poultice described in the treatise on poultices.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And apply that several times, for that is the manner of cauterization.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And do that according to the order of the medicines which we have already said.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And if he heals well from that, then do nothing; but if not, then do to him three cauteries in the rear part of his head, which descend from the highest part of the head towards the lowest part of the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And place between each cautery the thickness of a finger, and then treat the cauteries with what comes out.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	But if you see improvement and the patient is able to tolerate it, then do to him cauterization in the middle part; but if you see greater improvement, then cauterize him over both corners.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Then treat that until it is healed; and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to the shape described above.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter 9
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	On cauterization for paralyses and on softening of all the body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	Let the patient's head be purified with leeches and with what we have said; then shave the patient's head and cauterize him with cautery in the middle part of his head, and with cautery on all the corners of his head, and with cautery on the rear part of his neck, and with three cauteries over the spine of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the softening of the body for too much of that and the patients tolerate it, and the disease is strong, then cauterize him with four cauteries on the spine of his back, and lastly with cautery until half a barleycorn has been burned, and lift up your hand.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	Then treat that until it is healed; and let this be the olive-shaped cautery.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	On cauterization for epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	Let the epileptic not be cauterized unless his epilepsy is caused by phlegm.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And then let the brain of him be purified at the beginning by the servant with leeches and with the other treatment which we have said in the division when the patient is large and is able to tolerate the excess of the medicines.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if he is a child who does not tolerate the medicines, then administer poultices and masticables by the servant purifying, before that for several days, with beneficial foods.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	And then shave the patient's head; and then cauterize him with one cautery in the middle part of his head according to the previous manner, and with another cautery on the back of his head, and cauterize over each corner of his head.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is strong and tolerant, then cauterize him with cauteries which we have said, having paralysis and softening of the body over the spine of the neck and over the spine of the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And let it be olive-shaped according to what has been said before.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	But if the patient is a child, then apply a delicate cautery according to this manner.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	On cauterization for melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupt and moist humors and phlegm, then cauterize him with the cauteries which we have said in the section on paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is excess phlegm going down into melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give him what purifies his brain according to what has preceded in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	And then shave the patient's head, and then make a decently made turban of linen and place it around his neck; then apply that on the middle part of his head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And let him be sixty days old, and let him be held in every part.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And then apply a poultice; and it is more worthy of a young sheep's milk.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And heat that on the fire with moderate warmth, which he endures when it is within him.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	And then apply that on the middle part of his head around the circle, and let him be within until he is relaxed.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And do that with the patient throughout the week once a day, and let him have the other regimen within him until he is healed; or if you want, cauterize him making small points according to his age: this is a special cautery which moistens the brain with equality.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	And then apply that cold in a woolen bandage or in linen bandages.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter 12
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	On cauterization for water descending into the throat.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When it is declared that water enters the throat through the holes which you have seen in the division, then begin and give the patient what purifies his brain; and guard him from all moistness.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And let him sip at a bath in lukewarm water for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	And then command that he rinses his head, and cauterize him with cautery in the middle part of his head; and then cauterize him with two cauteries over two temples if the beginning is water in two holes, or from one side if it begins from one hole.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Puncture with cautery all the veins and arteries which are below the barleycorn; and let the cauteries be in that length in the width of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And beware of blood flow when cauterizing; and if you see blood flowing from him, stop it with whatever medicine is available to you.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And let the wisdom that is in the extraction of arteries and the abstention from those and the cauterization of blood flow come to you.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And sometimes it is cauterized on the neck under the jaw bones with two cauteries recently produced.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	Of cauterization of old tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When tears of the eyes are old and there is an excess of phlegmatic fluid flowing through the veins and arteries, which are evident in a protruding lump on the head, then cauterize that with the cautery we described in the chapter on preventing water from going into the eyes, and cauterize it also at the middle part of the head, and with two cauteries at the neck under the temples, and with two cauteries at the neck under the jaw bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if there is a need for addition, then cauterize that all around the corner of the eye above the upper eyelid with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	Of cauterization of bad odor from the nose.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you have treated him with what we have said in the division and your treatment is not effective, then prepare and give the patient enemas for three nights; then shave his head, and cauterize it with a cautery made of olive oil.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	Then cauterize that with a cautery made of clove on the two upper eyelids, just below where the hair starts, with two small cauteries.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And beware of the artery so you do not burn it.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And this is how the clove cautery is made:
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	Of cauterization to soften the eyelids of the eyes.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the eye is softened due to illness or humidity, then cauterize that eyelid with a lunar cautery; and this is how it is made:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you are treating the upper eyelids, cauterize them with two small cauteries all around, and let them be elongated from the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And the length of each cautery should be according to the size of the eyelid.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press your hand with the cautery too much, but according to how much the third part of the eyelid is attached.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	Of cauterization of the eyelid when the hairs are converted into parts inside and close the eye.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the hairs of the eye are converted into parts inside and close the eye, there are two ways to cauterize them: either with a cautery made of fire or with a burning medicine.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If you cauterize him with fire, command the patient to open his eyes so that the hairs are pulled out with them as they grow and are elongated; and if he closes his eyes, then you strengthen his eyelids with a bandage so that he does not rub his eyes while the hairs grow.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Then as they grow and become elongated, then place the patient's head in your lap, and press on the eyelid of the eye with your finger, with the sign being according to the shape of a dead leaf, and let the sign be near the hairs.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	Then place a cotton pad soaked in egg white or in mullein tea on the eye.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	Then ignite the cautery, of which this is how it is made:
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	Then cauterize over the figure you have marked, little by little, in small areas, until all of the surface of the eyelid is burned, which should be like a myrtle leaf, appearing completely healthy.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	And the sign of the success of your work is that you see the eyelid of the eye already contracted and the hairs of the eye elevated above the puncture of the eye.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And then raise your hand and let him lie down for three days, and then place a bandage on him until the scab is healed.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then treat that with ointment until it is healed.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	But if the hairs return for any reason and the eyelid is softened, then repeat the cauterization on that eye again just as you did at first.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	But if the hairs are in the lower eyelid, then cauterize that until it is elevated to its natural place and elongated, and let the hairs not touch the eye.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	But the cautery with burning medicine is that you command the patient to open his eyes so that the hairs are pulled out with them as they grow and become elongated, and then let it be made of linen in the shape of a myrtle leaf.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. .i., o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	Then take sagewort and live coals, one ounce each. .I. Put them in a mortar and pestle, and mix those ingredients well, and make it into a poultice so that it is not too cold; then spread that on the linen which is made in the shape of a myrtle leaf, and apply that to one eye or both; then let the patient lie down with his head in your lap.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	Then hold the poultice over the medicine and press it gently so that the patient feels the biting of the medicine, for the biting is in him like fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And when he feels the biting, then let him drink the medicine and wipe it off with his own finger; then when the biting stops, let him rinse the eye with water, and then examine if the eyelid is lifted up as it was washed with fire or with a cut, for then it is well; and if it returns to that which the medicine was applied on the spot where the medicine did not penetrate and is blackened as your operation is healed and the eye is contracted.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	Then place a bandage on him until the scab of the swelling is eradicated, and then treat that with ointment of hellebore or another so that it is healed.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	It is necessary for you, after your operation, to guard against the eye being damaged by the medicine with great diligence, and if the eyelid after a few days is softened and for some reason the hairs enter the eye, then repeat your medicine on that spot of the eyelid which is softened, and precisely as you did at the beginning, and treat him until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is the shape of a myrtle leaf.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And know that men' eyes are diverse according to their size and smallness, and therefore according to how your contraction is made.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And not being doubtful about the path of truth to him who is taught in this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	Of cauterization of a fissure which is in the tear duct of the eye.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you cure a fissure with what we have said in the divisions of illnesses and your treatment does not work, then know that you cauterize it in this way: command the patient to lie down his head in your lap, and let someone hold his head up by the hair so that it is not rubbed or moved with his head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	Then place a cotton pad soaked in egg white or in mullein tea on the eye of him.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	Then ignite the cautery, of which this is how it is made:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	Which should be hollow, like a reed or a pen, and from one end is made the cautery.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you see that it has penetrated into the other extremity.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you want to let it out in this way, then do so with a tent.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	But the one who is hollowed out is better for your work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	Then press the fistula if it is open and bring out from him pus and dry up that fluid.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not open then open it and extract the fluid from him.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And then place on him the cautery which should be well lit and hold your hand a little below the cautery at the opening of the nose so that your hand does not get burnt or the patient is not disturbed and then place the cautery in the wounds of the nose and corrupt that area.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And so if at the beginning of your cautery it goes into the bone then that is good and if not then repeat the cautery one or two times if necessary; leave it like that for three days, and then place a bandage on that area and wrap it with a drying ointment until it is healed.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	But if twelve days have passed and it has not healed then place a corrosive acute medicine on it so that the bone is uncovered and scrape it according to what is convenient in its chapter.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And there is another way of cauterizing a fistula which some first said: enter the site of the fistula and open it and then place in that fissure subtle cement of which its shape is like this: melt an ounce of lead into that, and hold your hand with cement with good retention so that the melted lead does not come to the hole of that; and cover the hole on the patient's nose with cotton or water, because lead adheres to the site of the fistula and heals it with a wonderful cure.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about cauterization and treatment then that is good; and if not then it is necessary to administer a nose piercing and reduce the fistula to the cavity of the nose according to what will come in its own place.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter 18.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	Of cauterization of the split of the foot.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Many times there are splits in the lips and mostly in the lips of children.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	So when you heal those splits with what we have said in the divisions and your treatment is not effective then light the cautery knife in this form as it is described:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And let its cavity be according to the thinness of the blade.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Then place it carefully in those splits so that the cautery reaches the bone of the splits.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And then heal that with wax so that it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter 19.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	Of cauterizing a fistula in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When in the root of the uvula or on the palate or in the roots of the teeth there is an apthoe and it starts to fester and it is broken, and it is aged, and there is rust and it becomes a fistula, and you heal that and your treatment is not effective then place the cautery which is received in the fistula; and hold your hand so that the iron reaches the bone of it, and do this one or two times; and heal that with what we have said about healing so that it is healed.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And so if the pus is discharged and it is healed then that is good; and if not then it is necessary to uncover the area and scrape off the rotten bone according to what will come in its chapter.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	Of cauterization of teeth and of softening of gums.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the gums are softened by humidity and the teeth are burned and you heal those with medicines and they do not help then place the patient's head in your lap, and light the cautery of which its form will come here, in such a way that you place the tongs over the tooth and enter into it the lit cautery quickly, and hold your hand a little so that the patient feels the heat of the fire at the root of the tooth to be reached.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	And then lift your hand and repeat the cautery several times according to what you want.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	And then the patient should fill his mouth with salty water and hold it for an hour, and then spit it out, because the burned tooth is firm and the soft gum is tightened and the corrupted humidity is dried up.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	Of cauterization of toothache.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When toothache is from coldness, or in it there is pain or redness, or the medicine does not help then cauterization in that is according to two ways: either cauterize with cow's dung or cauterize with fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Cauterization with dung is that you take the dung of cows and cook it in horse's manure, and then take a stick and wrap it over the end of the tongue, and then dip that in the hot dung and place it on the painful tooth quickly so that it is heated.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And then repeat that several times so that the virtue of the fire reaches the root of the teeth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you want, dip wool or a stick in the dung above mentioned, and place it on the painful tooth, and hold the iron over it so that the iron reaches the cavity of the tooth.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	But cauterization with fire is that you attend to the tongs of iron or steel, and there is some thickness in it and the sharpness of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	And then light the cautery of which its form will come, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand so that the cautery is hot; and do this several times because the pain is increased or in that day or in the other day.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And let the patient fill his mouth with good dung and hold it for an hour and then spit it out; and this is the way of cauterization.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And cauterize whatever you see according to what is possible for you.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the way of the tongs:
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	Of cauterizing hernia.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When hernia is from phlegm and cold humors and they are not opened by medicine and you see their digestion slightly then light the cautery of which its form follows, having two ends bent so that smoke comes out of the cautery from the other end, and place that lit on the hernia once, and if it does not come out of it then do this another time so that it reaches the bone of the hernia.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the hernia is small then place the cautery according to the quantity of the hernia, and let it rest for three days and place on it a bandage soaked in dung so that what the fire has burned is softened.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And then heal that with ointment and poultices and bandages so that it is healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And the way of the tongs or the cautery there is such.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter 23.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	Of cauterizing laryngitis and of constriction of voice.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When humidity comes over the larynx and especially when there is coldness of complexions then let the patient be evacuated at the beginning with laxative medicines and then cauterize that from the root of the gullet in the place which is depurged.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And be careful that you do not reach with the cautery to the gullet or do not burn of the membrane of it but a little.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And cauterize that with another cautery at the joint of the neck in his last vertebra.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	And the cautery of it should be a red-hot iron rod as described previously.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	Then treat that with what has already been mentioned so that it may heal.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter 24.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	Of cautery for lung diseases and coughing.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When a cough and lung disease are caused by moist humors, and the patient does not have a fever or tuberculosis, and it is an old disease, then cauterize that with two cauteries over the furcula in the places below the collarbones, and with another cautery in the middle of the chest between the two nipples; and let the cauteries be red-hot according to the previous form.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you want, let your cautery be pricking with the cautery that is called 'puncta', the form of which precedes in the puncturing of ear pain.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And let there be pricks within those; and then treat that with what has already been mentioned so that it may heal.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And when the cautery has three wounds, for such cautery use one caustic according to this form:
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	Of cautery for tics which are in the head of the helper.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the head of the assistant is dislocated due to slippery humors and does not return to its place in its usual way, and it is displaced a little bit as it tries to move back, just as we have witnessed, then first reduce the dislocation, and let the patient's head be turned back towards his chest or onto one side; and then lift up the neck which is at the front of the tic where it begins inside the jaw with your left hand if the joint is dislocated there.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let the cautery have two heads; and this is its form:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And then cauterize the neck so that it penetrates from one side to the other; and then the figure of the cautery will come from two-headed cauteries.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is subtle according to the amount of tenting; and this is its form:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And sometimes it is adjusted according to this account, and that is why there are eight cauteries.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And then put honey on the cautery and let the patient be quiet, and do not disturb him for some time until he is comforted.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is above and it is tight, then cauterize over the muscle with a red-hot cautery or with pointed cauteries, for the joint is confirmed and the humidity is broken up and the patient is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	Of cautery of the stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When a person's stomach is filled with humors and movements that disturb the stomach and multiply its contents, and if you continue with your healing practices without success, then let the patient be on his back, with his head reclined and his arms stretched out, and cauterize that with three cauteries: one cautery below the feet according to the amount of a finger using a red-hot cautery, and two cauteries below the ribs so that the figure of a triangular cautery comes; and lengthen these so that they are not adjusted which will cause burning.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cautery is two-thirds of the thickness of the neck.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And let the figure of the cautery be according to this form, and if you want, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and this should be a cautery according to the form of a circle according to this form:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And let the stomach be punctured by that which is scared by this cautery: and when you feel a point on the stomach according to the amount you want with a tent, then cauterize that with a cautery in the points; and then treat that with the healing that has already been mentioned so that it may heal.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	Of cautery for a sore throat.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When there is pain in the throat due to chafing or humidity or gross windiness so that from its normal complexions it is driven out by excessive egress, and it is healed with what we have said and does not conform, then let the patient be reclined on his back, and feel with a tent three cauteries according to this form and this quantity placed over the throat below the hypochondria where a man lies on his side.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And let the space between each cautery be according to the thickness of a finger, and let the cautery be according to the length of the body straight.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not move your hand with the cautery.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the amount of what is burned is the amount of the thickness of the neck, and if it is not tight; and if the patient stands on his feet; and if he does not stand, then let him lie down, for he has already stretched out his arms, and raise up his arms.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And it is up to you to cauterize these cauteries with a cautery blade, when you are subtle and prudent in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And be careful not to overdo it in the cauterization, and let the thickness of all the neck be cauterized so that it may go into the intestines, for here the neck is subtle; and know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	Of piercing of an abscess in the throat with a cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When there is an abscess or ulcer in the throat and you want to know whether this abscess is in the flesh of the throat or in its membrane, then if it is in the flesh of the throat, the patient will have a heavy breath and the pain will become acute.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the membrane of the throat, there will be great pain and many doctors have tired themselves from treating him.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore let the patient be turned towards his chest; and then feel the location of the abscess with a tent; and then take the cautery which is assembled like a needle, the form of which has been described in the other page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And cauterize it with that cautery until all the neck is burnt, so that it goes into the chest, so that phlegm may come out.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that for the healing of other abscesses so that it may heal.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And do not use this form of cautery unless that which you have learned in the art of medicine is prolonged, and in whose hand many diseases are known; however, sometimes let it be applied to this operation, but nevertheless, know this, and it is better.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	Of cautery of pleurisy.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	Take the ancient cauteries of the roots of aristology for pleurisy according to this manner which is being made, and that you take from the roots of aristology a long dry root which is found, and let it be of the thickness of a finger.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	And then soak it in oil and heat it in the fire, and then cauterize with a cautery in that location which is between the continuation of the furcula and the neck; and with two small cauteries below the guidazes, one declining slightly to the part where the beard is found, and with two cauteries on what is declining between the fifth rib and the breastbone, declining slightly to the parts behind; and with another cautery in the middle of the chest; and with a cautery in that location which is between the two shoulders, and with two cauteries on the sides of the chest, below the cautery which is between the two shoulders.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And you must not burn your hand with the cautery, but it should be in the hollow of the armpit, in action.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And some ancient people said that some of the men who use cauteries of iron similar to a needle, ignite it and place it in the space between the ribs, until they reach the pustule and the healthy flesh is exposed, just as we have said about the pustule of the liver.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	But in this piercing with cautery, there is no fear, because the humor soon escapes from the location of the fistula to which there is no cure.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter 30.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	Of the cauterization of the mouth.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you treat the illness of the mouth with what we have said about treatment in division and do not apply your treatment, then cauterize it according to three methods, all of which are correct. The first is that you make three or four cauteries depending on the length of the mouth according to the figure of the cauteries of the liver, the figure of which has preceded.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And the distance between each cautery should be the thickness of a finger or a little more, and the manner of the cautery should be the same as we have said about the cautery of the liver in every way.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not burn your hand with the cautery; and let the patient be above you.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And there is another way to cauterize, which is that you ignite the cautery having two garments, the cause of which we have said in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and elevate the vein which is in the end of the mouth through which passes the jaw of the left patient.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And let your elevation by which you elevate the vein be according to the length of the body, so that the cauteries are made according to the width of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	Then insert the two garments, ignite them, into that space through which you penetrate the vein from the other side.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And then extract the cautery; and thus four cauteries are made.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you wish, cauterize with a cautery having three garments.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And then you cure the cautery once it has stopped burning for several days, because it is more beneficial than the other causes preceding in the treatment.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	Of cauterization of hydrocephalus.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Do not cauterize in hydrocephalus except in the scrotum specifically.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you treat hydrocephalus with the methods of treatment we have said in division and do not apply your treatment, then cauterize it with four cauteries around the scrotum, and with one cautery over the stomach, and with another cautery over the liver, and with another cautery over the mouth, and with two cauteries between the vertebrae of the back, and with one cautery on the right side of the foot, and with another cautery over the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the amount of the depth of the cautery should be proportional to the thickness of the vein.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And then let the cautery burn for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not discharge the patient after the cautery with what you have done so that two tendencies are added to him and healing is encouraged by it.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cautery with which the belly is cauterized should be clavicle according to what its shape is above, and that with which the back is cauterized should be olive according to what its shape precedes.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter 32.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	Of cauterization of feet and thighs.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are pustules in hydrops and are filled with yellow water, then cauterize the feet over the instep of the foot in the space between the auricular and annular fingers, and elevate your hand by the cautery and do not twist it; and then elevate your hand, and do not return it at all, because the yellow water exudes.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	It is the cautery according to this shape: And then make two cauteries over both thighs, and in each thigh let the cautery be made with the end of the cautery blade.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And let the cautery be according to the length of the thigh, one below the knee and the other above the knee joint of the thigh; and over each thigh two cauteries.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And let the wound remain open after treatment for a long time so that no water exudes from it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And then cure with those causes which we have said.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter 33.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	Of cauterization of the body of the belly.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When the body of the belly is due to rubbing and humidity so that the digestive and retentive humors are weakened in the stomach and intestines, and is treated with the methods of treatment which we have said and do not apply, and sometimes the patient suffers cautery from the excessive humor, then cauterize it with a large cautery over his stomach according to what has preceded in the cauterization of the stomach, with the cautery of the circle and four cauteries around the scrotum subtly, with a subtle clavicle cautery; and with cautery over the scrotum over aloesis greatly, or with two cauteries.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if you see excessive humidities and the patient tolerates it, then cauterize it over the penis and over the intestines, and tightly bind two cauteries over the stomach near the groins, for this is a perfect treatment of youth from which there is no error.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter 34.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	Of cauterization of ancient hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When there are in nature ancient hemorrhoids or one of thick humors rubbed or of corrupt humidities, and they are cured with what we have said in division and do not apply your treatment, then cauterize it with three cauteries over the pus below the small vertebrae of the back triangularly, and with a cautery above the navel through two holes.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that his stomach is rubbed and his food is not digested, and his face is pustular, then cauterize it over the stomach with a large cautery according to what has preceded; and with one cautery over the liver, and with another cautery over his mouth with a clavicle cautery, and let the cautery remain open for some time, and then cure it when it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	Of cauterization of athreye near the incision of their scrotum.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you excise athreye, then ignite the cautery that is assembled like a needle.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Then insert it into the athreye that has been excised, and finish your hand when it reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood comes.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And do one or two times, for if they are many, then cauterize each of them according to what we have recounted, and then cure those with what you have applied to them when it is healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize with a large cautery over the scrotum, it is better in youth.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter 36.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	Of cauterization of fistulas that are made in nature through the parts of his body.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not obey the work which we have commanded in its place, and the patient is frightened by it, let it be healed by cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Therefore when you see a fistula in nature through, and it is ancient, and corrupt humidities, and then what is pus worthy that it is that you pierce it with a subtle probe, and then know the amount of its depth by the above-mentioned probe.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Then light the cautery that is similar to a ray.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And then place that cautery into the fistula according to the amount in which you enter the tent.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And repeat on that the cautery is inserted until those corrupted bodies are burnt once or twice or three times according to the amount of your need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And beware of the combustion of nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes to the body of the bladder or the body of the intestine, then beware of all those places; and do not do this unless the fistula is in a fleshy place and you think it is not penetrating.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	Then heal the place where it is healed.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the place is sealed and the matters are cut off from it and remain like that for a long time, then know that it is completely healed.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the matters are not removed from it, then know that it is penetrating into its bone or that the bones are corrupted, or it will come from those causes of which memory will return to its place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter .xxxvii.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	Of cauterization of the sinuses.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When in the sinuses there is pain because of friction or because of great windiness, and for that reason the patient's head hurts, then you must cauterize that on the sinuses with a cautery nail from which comes the memory.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And quickly cauterize them again with a small one, so that there will be three cauteries lined up and then they will go away in succession.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter .xxxviii.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	Of cauterization of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When there is weakness and softening of the bladder due to friction and humidity so that the patient does not retain urine, then cauterize that at the top of the pus below the bladder, where the hairs of the pubic region begin, and cauterize with one cautery on the right side, and with another on the left side.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And let the length of each cautery be according to the amount of the hairs; and cauterize that with a cautery at the bottom of the two, or with two cauteries if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And let the cautery nail be according to what is being done.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter .xxxix.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	Of cauterization of the hernia.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When there is friction and humidity in the hernia, and for that reason impregnation is prohibited, and its tissues are corrupted, and the provocation of them is delayed, and pain comes because of their holding, then you must cauterize the place with three cauteries around the navel, just as we have said in the cauterization of the bladder; and with a cautery on the bottom of the two, or with two cauteries, and let the cautery nail be.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter .xl.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	Of cauterization of the dislocation of the elbow.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When mucous humors are infiltrated at the beginning of the elbow and the cause is the movement of its joint, and a sign of it is that the bone is prolonged beyond the other when compared between them.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the place of the dislocation is obstructed in which they are boiled.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then you must cauterize the patient on the inside of the elbow with a circular cautery that is similar to a ring, because you will have marked it with a tent in the circuit of the beginning just as it is bent, and so that the beginning falls at the center of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And let the cautery be the same one as before in the cauterization of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if that cautery is not available to you, then cauterize it with three cauteries with an olive-shaped cautery.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And let the cautery be done according to the amount of the thickness of all the cord; and then heal that which is healed.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter .xli.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	Of cauterization of the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain comes in the beginning of the elbow and its cause is friction and humidity, and the patient is cured by that which we have said and does not confer, and it is old, then you must laxate the patient from thick humors with suppurative pills or artificial pills or similar; and then cauterize.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And the manner of the cautery in that is according to two manners: or cautery with burning medicines, or cautery with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	They go according to two known manners, one of which is that you cauterize it on the inside of the arm with three triangular cauteries according to this form; and make them well into the depth.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And let the space between each cautery be the amount of the thickness of the finger, and if the olive-shaped or large cautery.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	Sometimes it must be the cautery on the center over the head of the elbow so that there are four cauteries.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you want, cauterize with the circle of which is preceded the form in the cauterization of the dislocation of the elbow, and let it be a containing circle and burn the thickness of all the cord.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the manner of cautery in sciatica when pain is adherent to the elbow and it does not extend into the thigh.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	But if it extends into the thigh, then cauterize that on the thigh on the place to which the pain goes, and with one cautery over four fingers a little from the muscular part.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if the cautery is cut, then let the depth of the cautery be according to the amount of the thickness of the cord.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the pain goes so that it is extended into the place between the fingers of the feet, then cauterize that where it goes in with cautery by three points or four or more if there are signs from that.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the pain goes to the thigh behind the knee of the leg, then cauterize that here with a cut cautery.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And beware in all cauterization that you do not go too far with the cautery so as to burn nerve or large artery, and so that it is upon the patient harm or contradiction.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And so you have seen one of those whom they cauterized on the arm and finished in the cauterization, and the fire was inflated within so that the tumor obtained it by the foot, and it was perforated and corrupted all over the foot.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	Then strong solution of the belly occurred, and then death followed.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two places at once, cauterize each one according to this manner.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And the wise said in the cauterization of the elbow that cautery which is this manner: make similar to a ring of iron whose circuit is the length of a palm; and let its orifices be according to the thickness of an almond bone or less by a little.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And within that circle there is another third; and let the space between them be the amount of the hairs of the fingers; and those circles are open at two places; and let the length of those be a hair or two hairs, and do in those margins of iron decently bent into the circles; and this is its form:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Then it is to be heated in the fire so that it becomes red hot and sparks come out of it, and then let it be placed on the inside of the arm, and let the patient fall on his side.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And then cauterize that with three cauteries round in one day.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And let him lie like that for three days; then plaster that with a poultice and let the wound be open for drops of days; and then heal that which is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Here is the translation of the first sentence:
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	Here is the translation of the second sentence:
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	Here is the translation of the third sentence:
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	Here is the translation of the fourth sentence:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	Here is the translation of the fifth sentence:
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	Here is the translation of the sixth sentence:
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	Here is the translation of the seventh sentence:
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Here is the translation of the eighth sentence:
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	Here is the translation of the ninth sentence:
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	Here is the translation of the tenth sentence:
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Here is the translation of the eleventh sentence:
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	Here is the translation of the twelfth sentence:
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	Here is the translation of the thirteenth sentence:
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	Here is the translation of the fourteenth sentence:
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	Here is the translation of the fifteenth sentence:
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	Here is the translation of the sixteenth sentence:
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	Here is the translation of the seventeenth sentence:
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	Here is the translation of the eighteenth sentence:
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	Here is the translation of the nineteenth sentence:
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	Here is the translation of the twentieth sentence:
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	Here is the translation of the twenty-first sentence:
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	Here is the translation of the twenty-second sentence:
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	Here is the translation of the twenty-third sentence:
Capitol .xlii.	Here is the translation of the twenty-fourth sentence:
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	Here is the translation of the twenty-fifth sentence:
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Here is the translation of the twenty-sixth sentence:
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	Here is the translation of the twenty-seventh sentence:
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Here is the translation of the twenty-eighth sentence:
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	Here is the translation of the twenty-ninth sentence:
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	Here is the translation of the thirtieth sentence:
Capitol .xliii.	Here is the translation of the thirty-first sentence:
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	Here is the translation of the thirty-second sentence:
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Here is the translation of the thirty-third sentence:
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	Here is the translation of the thirty-fourth sentence:
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	Here is the translation of the thirty-fifth sentence:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	Here is the translation of the thirty-sixth sentence:
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	Here is the translation of the thirty-seventh sentence:
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	Here is the translation of the thirty-eighth sentence:
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	Here is the translation of the thirty-ninth sentence:
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	Here is the translation of the fortieth sentence:
Capitol .xliv.	Here is the translation of the forty-first sentence:
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	Of cauterization for gout and joint pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And if there is a cure for gout caused by cold humors and the pain remains, then it should be cauterized.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And you should cauterize around the joint of the foot with a cautery tool.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	The cautery iron should be made of olive wood, and it should have this shape:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make punctures on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery iron.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pain rises into the testicles or other joints, and it refuses to go away, then cauterize every testicle with three or four cauteries using this olive wood cautery iron.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if it is necessary to use this cautery iron, then cauterize it and do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery iron beforehand, but simply touch the surface of the skin.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pain rises into the testicles and scrotum, then administer the cautery that we have discussed in its chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pain is only in the hands and it is called sciatica, then make punctures around the circle of the joints where they rotate, puncturing in those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if the pain remains in the fingers, then make punctures around the joints of the fingers on each knuckle and at the base of the hand.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pain rises into the hips or muscles, then cauterize each of these parts all around with cautery.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	Do not discharge the patient from good treatment and reception of medicines, for if good treatment is performed and phlegm is discharged with this cautery, may God help them heal.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 45.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	Of cauterization for broken bones.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When there is a break in the angles and tears in front of the intestines into the generative organ, and it starts to come out, then you should order the patient to stop eating for his day and to use cooling remedies so that the wound does not come out of his belly.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	Then follow the patient's instructions on how to hold his body and command him to keep his air within that is either vomited or the intestines or hernia comes out.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	Then return it with your fingers and signal the broken bone by feeling around the knee, signaling the end of which is similar to half a circle at the upper parts of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Then light the cautery iron of which this is the shape:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	while it is still red and burning.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	Then place the cautery iron on that signal with your hand holding the cautery iron upright, and put it there until you feel the bone within the joint of the elbow; and repeat with another cautery iron if you have not achieved it in the first application onto the bone.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	And be careful with the feeling of the hernia during the time of cauterization, that you do not burn it so that it does not come over the patient and cause death or some great harm.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And know that when you with the cautery do not touch the bone, your operation will not succeed.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And see that the cautery of children be subtle according to their size and measure.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	Then treat the place of cauterization for three days with an ointment while the scar of the fire is healing.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then cure it with other ointments until it is healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And let the patient lie on his back for 40 days while the place is sealed and the wound closed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And see that he is fed according to the length of time of his cure which wounds the belly, and let the hernia not come out through exertion while healing.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And when he wants to get up after 40 days, then administer a decently made bandage and have him for another 40 days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And let him be restless and full of appetite for food and drink, and of vigorous spirits, for when he uses this remedy of healing entirely it will heal.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And if you desire to cure broken bones in other parts of the belly, and especially at the beginning, then cauterize the break according to its quantity, and it is what is exhausted from the chest like the third part of it; then cure it with what we have said, and it is not closed.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And now, first of all, let the broken bone be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this shape, then feel it with your hand:
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	And it is placed a line that extends along the width on the side above the break, and another line above it; and your hand held with a cautery nail, yet the first cautery is easier and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	Of cauterization for torticollis.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When there is pain in any member from a blow or from striking, and the pain persists for a long time and does not respond to any treatment with medicines, then see that you cauterize with a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And let the cautery be for each member according to its size and smallness, and according to its weakness and heaviness, and according to the location of torticollis and pain in it.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	So if he is healed by the first cautery, then it is; and if not, then repeat the cautery on him; for usually of those pains are punctured in a member near to which member he approaches, so that you know them with the cautery where the patient is healed.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	Of cauterization for leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	The leper some times with cautery for great healing, and by magicking if the leprosy that is made by putrefaction of phlegm and of melancolia.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And so when you want to cauterize it, consider if the leprosy is putrid and as that cured with what we have said in the division and not of them, nor of this, and fear about the patient that the corruption includes all his body and all its complexions, then cauterize him on the head with V cauteries: with one in the middle location of the head, and with the second lower down from him, lift the forehead at the ends of the hair; and both over the horns; and with one behind, over the nape or servitz.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And finally your hand with the cautery press a little into the bone, and from him are displaced the scales, so that the expiration of thick vapors is eased from him; then cauterize over the pustule according to how it is prescribes.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if the leprosy is already expanded over the patient and appears manifestly, then see that you cauterize him with those cauteries which we have said in the head; and cauterize on the end of the nose, and with two cauteries on the two eyelids, and with two cauteries on the two shoulder blades, and with six cauteries over the shoulder blade, and one great over the shoulder blade near the armpit, and one on the armpit, and with two over the elbows, and one on each elbow, and with two over the hips, and one on each hip, and with two over the thighs, and one over each thigh, and with two over the knees, and one on each knee, and with two over the shins, and one on each shin, and with two over the ankles, and one over each ankle, and with two over the insteps, and one on each instep, and with two over the heels, and one on each heel, and with two over the toes, and one on each toe, and with two over the fingers, and
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	Be careful of the nerves that are on the heel, lest you burn them.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	And sometimes a cautery is applied to the bones of the penis and another to the mouth of the stomach, and another to the intestines.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And know that the more you apply cauteries, the more beneficial and effective they are; and know that the patient does not feel pain from the cautery, just as with the fingers, because his body is already numbed.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And you should make the cauteries large or small according to the parts and joints, according to what is specified by the characteristics of the tools.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then dress the wound with wheat flour mixed with honey and other healing remedies until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	On cauterization for stupor.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When a limb is paralyzed or asleep and is not healed by medicines, oils, and poultices, then you should cauterize that paralyzed limb with cauteries according to the size of the limb or its smallness.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And let your cautery enter the thickness of the skin a little bit.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then dress that with ointment until it is healed.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And sometimes a stupor is cauterized where the nerves that move the limb and the feet are, and the vertebrae of the back, and see the movement of the nerves that move that limb, and the stupor is eliminated.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	But do not presume about this unless you are knowledgeable in the anatomy of the limbs and the emergence of nerves throughout the body.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	On cauterization for white leprosy.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When white leprosy is old and does not respond to any of the medicinal ointments, then you should cauterize it with a red-hot cautery a little bit according to the thickness of the skin so that the whiteness and color are eliminated, and the color is changed.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	Then dress that with wheat flour and lentil flour mixed with rose oil, and with leaves of the wild rosemary plant, and with pigeon blood or guinea fowl blood; let each be a separate portion and all be mixed together, and then have it bound up in a linen cloth and placed over the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .l.	Chapter 50.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	On cauterization for cancer.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When a cancer has begun and you want it to stop, then cauterize it with a circular cautery around its circumference as it is rolling around.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And the wise say that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle of it; but I have not seen this, because I fear that it would cause an ulcer, and I have seen this happen a few times.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And it is much better that it be cauterized around its circumference with a circular cautery, as we have said, or with many cauteries.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 51.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	On cauterization for suppuration.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When suppuration is delayed in ripening, and this is due to excess, or due to the state of the patient who is old and emaciated, or due to time, and you want to hasten the ripening of suppuration; then cauterize around it with many small puncturing cauteries; and then let that hasten its ripening.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	But if you want to pierce it with a cautery, then heat the cautery of which this is the shape of it; and then place that in the middle of suppuration so that it penetrates the skin.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the cautery is in that place that is lower down, so that the arm is lifted up; and then dress that until it is healed.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 52.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	On cauterization for corrosion.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corrosion is a decaying that walks through the limb, which corrodes it as fire consumes dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore if you see corrosion in a place that can be cauterized with fire, then heat small nail-like cauteries, and make them large according to what is appropriate in the place where there is corrosion.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	Then cauterize that completely all over so that you eradicate all of the corrosion and do not leave any cause for it to return.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	Then let that be bound up for three days, and place your fingers over the cauterized spots with soft pressure so that the scars are all eradicated and all of the corrosion.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	Then dress that with ointments that generate flesh.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	But if after three days you see that the flesh is not growing and there is still corrosion, then repeat the cautery over that which is rotten in the places of corruption.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And corrosion is sometimes treated with sharp medicine because it is intermediate in the place of cauterization.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	But nevertheless cauterization with fire is more beneficial.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And I have already spoken of its cure with sharp medicine in the division; and therefore take that when there is an increased tendency from it.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 53.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	On cauterization for warts and similar growths.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Sometimes there are growths below the foot of the patient who is sick, which is called a wart, and it is a large cause, deep, which affects the foot; and cauterization in these is according to two manners: cauterization with fire and cauterization with hot water.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	But cauterization with fire is that you ignite the cautery made of iron according to the amount that it contains the wart all over, and let it be of thin margins.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	Then place that ignited cautery over the wart, and then move your hand with the cautery around the circumference of the wart so that the cautery reaches the depth of the wart.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	Let that be bound up for three days until it begins to emit pus from the arm.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	Then dress that with wild mallows crushed with salt, and place the poultice over that for one night, because that will uproot it from its roots.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	Then dress the wound with ointment that generates flesh until it is healed.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if it does not convert, and sometimes it affects the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet, then have a cauldron with water that is boiling hot, and pour that over the cautery; and take a quannula made of brass or iron or of stone, and place that over the wart; and let there be a little amount of the hot water that has been poured into the quannula, and hold it with your hand, and move that all around so that you compress it with the quannula from all sides, and press the margin of the quannula into the root of the wart, and pour the hot water into the cauldron through the quannula, and let the patient bear that for an hour, and then remove that because the wart will have been uprooted.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And do this to all of them in turn throughout their bodies.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	Then dress those warts whose roots have been eradicated with these ointments that generate flesh.
Capitol .liiii.	Chapter 54.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	On cauterization for trembling.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When there is trembling due to friction on the nerves or due to fever from a similar cause, or due to another cause that seems like it, then have him cauterized with four cauteries or with v on the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra with one cautery; and cauterize his feet, and on the chest with cauterization of olives.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the trembling of him is calmed and hastened by the sickness that causes it.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter 55.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	Of cauterization of white wounds on the body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When in the body there are white spots and pustules that are caused by thick, corrupted material; therefore, at the beginning when they appear, they should be cauterized on top of the fistula with a fine-tipped cautery tool made of mastic tree bark, the end of which is heated; or with a long, sharp needle; or with a lenticular cautery.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And sometimes it is cauterized at the beginning of its emergence according to this manner; and they are not believed to be wounds, but rather a disruption of superfluities caused by these things, and then they heal.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	However, it is better that this should be done with an evacuation using phlebotomy.
Capitol lvi.	Chapter 56.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	Of the cauterization of a flow of blood caused by an incision of an artery.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Sometimes a flow of blood from an artery that is cut due to a wound, or due to the incision of an abscess or cauterization of a limb, and similar cases, are difficult to stop.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Therefore, when this happens to someone, you must cover the orifice of the artery with your hand and place your finger inside to constrict it, thus stopping the flow of blood from below your finger, and preventing it from coming out again.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	Then place over the fire a few large olive-wood coals, as many times as needed, and blow on them so that they ignite.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	Then take one of those coals, either small or large depending on the location and severity of the wound, and apply it quickly to the vein that is bleeding profusely after you have constricted it with your finger, cauterizing it until the blood is stanched and the flow restricted.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the blood flows from the artery when you release your finger and loosen the cautery, then take another cautery that has been prepared in the fire, and continue doing this repeatedly until the blood is restricted.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And be careful not to burn the nerve that is here, and to cause any other evil for the patient.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to restrict the flow in those except by one of four means: either by cauterization as we have said, or by ligation if it has not been ligated; for when it is ligated the ends of it are burned and the flow restricted, or that it be bound with a ligature or with a ligature by strong constriction, or that remedies which restrict the flow be placed over it; and it is bound with a bandage with decent constriction.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	But he who provides decent restriction of it with ligature and constriction with a cloth, or by position of causes burning and similar, does not confer except for the worst.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	But if this happens to someone and the doctor is not present nor are remedies, then open with the tip of your finger over the orifice of that vein as we have said before, and apply strong constriction to it until the flow of blood is stopped from the main part of the wound; and over the artery the finger should not be released; and over the artery, rub with water mixed with something very cold until the blood congeals and thickens; and if there is a need for cauterization or medicine.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Begin the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Of incision and piercing, of punctures and phlebotomy, of wounds and their likes.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are the words of Albucasis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have already said in the first chapter about all illnesses for which fire cauterization and burning remedies are convenient, and the occasions and causes of them, and the instruments necessary for them with the forms of the cauteries; and we have arranged the chapters from the head down to the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And we will proceed in this chapter in that same way, so that the reader may be eased, then on what he has demanded.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And before we begin this, let us remind you that what is in this chapter is for horror and terror as it is in the first chapter of cauterization.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And therefore, let it be with great caution, for in the operation which is in this chapter there are many times evacuation which is by blood, by which life is removed from the sprinkling of the vein or incision upon the abscess or opening of the wound or piercing of the incision or extraction of arrow or incision of stone or their likes.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And from all of them are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in their hands is death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I warn you that it may not happen to you in which there is treachery; for sometimes it happens because of the ways of men with many illnesses.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And of them is he who goes away because of his illness and because of the length of his illness, and because the illness means death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And of those is he who gives you his word and promise, you hoping for his health; and his illness is harmful.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And therefore do not consent to him who comes to you in this manner; and your caution should be greater than his cunning and your greed; and do not presume any cause on that unless there is certain science which verifies it for you, and from whom laudable success comes.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And use in the cure of all your illnesses for prediction and indication of him who is converted to health; for in him are you helped in the acquisition of fame and memory, praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	O, sons, may God inspire your understanding and not hide from you direction and protection; for it is in his hand.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have ordered this chapter distinguished by chapters according to which it precedes in the chapter of cauteries, of the cure of the head down to the feet, so that it may be eased for you from what you demand and of which you have need.
Capitol primier.	First chapter.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	Of the cure of water which is contained in the head of infants.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	Know that this illness many times happens to infants because of childbirth, and when the mother stretches her neck.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And sometimes it is caused by a hidden cause which is not known.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	But I have not seen this illness except in infants; and to all of them to whom I have seen it, death has come to them, and thus is my experience with them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I have seen an infant whose head was filled with water, and his head was always magnified so that he could not control himself due to the size of his head, but rather that the humidity increased greatly until fire caused death.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this humidity is either accumulated between the brain and the bone, or is accumulated below the bone on the skull.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	For the operation in that if the humidity is between the brain and the bone and the abscess is slight, then you should make an incision in the middle of the head with an incision in the width, and the length of the incision should be two inches so that the humidity can run out; and this is the form of spatum:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And therefore if the humidity is increased and the abscess is greater, then there are two incisions according to this manner:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the humidity is below the bone, the sign of it is that you see the seams of the head opened to all parts and the water is pressed when you compress that with your hand to the parts within; and this is not hidden from you.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	Cut in three places in the middle of the head according to this method:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And then extract all moisture and tightly bandage the incisions with fabric and feathers. On the fifth day, open the bandages and apply wine and oil to the wound; loosen the ligature and treat the wound with tenting and poultices, and bandage the head tightly with equal pressure. Feed the patient dry food with little moisture until the affected member is comforted and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And there is another method of incision which takes into account the size of the abscess and the collection of fluid. Sometimes it is more appropriate to make an incision on the back of the neck, or in front, or on the right side, or on the left; therefore pay attention to where the abscess appears and the fluid collects, and open that up as best you can.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And there is another way to treat an abscess when it is accompanied by a headache: make an incision at the site of pain, and open the abscess to its cavity. Another method for cauterization is as follows:
Capitol .ii.	Chapter II.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	Of incisions in the arteries near the ears, called hilasseysse.
Capitol segon.	Second chapter.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When there is a problem in the ears or feet, and it is old, and the treatment with medicines does not work, then the last treatment is to open those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And therefore when you want to cut the arteries that run through the head, and then rub the area with a rough cloth so that the arteries appear, and then tightly bandage the neck of the patient with a cloth; and consider where the pulse is beating; and the locations of each one over the areas where the ears are depressed, and they remain hidden in some people.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And then press on the artery with a tent, and cut each one with a sharp instrument through the bone into the head, and open up to the width of the skull.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you want, insert the instrument below the artery and cut through it into the cavities above.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And let the length of the incision be two digits long, because when a vein is cut, blood rushes out in pulsating bursts, which jumps out frequently.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	But if the artery does not appear at the measurement, then measure from the ear the amount of space of three digits, and press with a tent, and cut through the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And let what comes out of the blood be the quantity of wine of an ounce, and quickly pour in from it more or less, and all that is according to the quantity that appears of the nature of the patient and the collection of the artery.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And consider the wound; therefore if any cause remains on the bone, then cut it out so that an abscess does not form.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And tightly bandage the wound with feathers and strips of linen cloth, and cure it with poultices until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	Of extraction of the arteries in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When to someone happens migraine or catarrh, because of hot and bitter humors and because of qualities in the temples, or violent old disease similar to those, and it is treated with methods of medical cure and that does not work, then we have discovered for such illnesses extraction of the arteries in the temples, or cauterization of those as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the manner of operation and extraction of those is that the patient feels them in his temples; understand the artery as it appears in the temple because it is shown to you by your pulse, and it is hidden except in a few people because of the violence of the pulse.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden from you, then tightly bandage the neck of the patient with some cloth; and rub the area with a rough cloth or moisten the spot with warm water until you see the artery clearly.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then take the instrument, which has this shape:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then pierce the vein with it easily until you reach the artery; and then pour into it onti and extract that to the upper parts, until you pull it out of the vein and discover that beneath it, from all directions.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	But if the artery is fine, then wrap it around with the end of the instrument, and cut one part according to the amount by which its ends are stretched and contracted, and no blood will flow out; for if they are not cut, blood will not flow at all.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And let the blood flow out of wine of an ounce, within three hours.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the artery is large, then tie it in two places with strong double-fold wool or with cords, and do not cut it off before the consolidation of the wound and let blood flow out.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And cut the superfluity which is between two ligatures; do this in that hour, or another hour.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you want, cauterize it with a cautery into the bone with a cautery knife so that its ends are cut off, and stay in place of that work.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it is better that the patient has fever or is of hot disposition; for cauterization is of those causes which help to drive out fine humors, and therefore it is better in youth.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And therefore let the extraction of the arteries that affect the old wound; and have it bandaged with decently made powders, and let it be cured with dry medicines which make the flesh grow and with poultices until it is healed.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if while you operate another outbreak of blood occurs from the artery, then tie that blood off, or with cauterization, or cut at the site of the wound, and tightly hold your hand over it so that the blood is restricted.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if none of those causes are present to you, then place your finger over the spot so that the blood is coagulated, and moisten the spot with hot water of strong heat until the ache is relieved, and tightly bandage according to where it hurts most.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And what is best in the extraction of an artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two prongs; because you have felt the two spots with a tent, and place each one, put out fire, within the bone so that they pierce the vein in two places, so that it is stretched out between its ends, because they are not consolidated at all by this cauterization.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the shape of the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And let the ache of both prongs be removed.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	But if it is better to have sharp ache with two prongs; because if they are blunt they will approach each other when rubbed, and not cut the flesh quickly.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore when there is any thickness in them, the heat of the fire is held in them and the flesh is cut more easily.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this work is better in all work, and moreover easier.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And let the space which is between two prongs be the quantity of the thickness of the finger.
Capitol quart.	Chapter IV.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	Of the cure of acute and sour pains in the bowels.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When they are sour pains, and it is the veins of those which are over the head, and no medicine works in that cure, and sometimes the face of the patient becomes red and feels in his forehead as if it were stung by ants, and his bowels are exhausted, and moisture comes out from inside because his skin is hot; and the ancient cure for those is cauterization.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And you command the patient to shave the hairs on their forehead, and then cut three equal incisions in the forehead according to its length.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the incision is two digits: let the first incision be equally distant according to the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a little more than the movement of the eyelids which are in the lacrimal gland, and the third from the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And beware of the incision of the arteries which are on both sides, and lengthen your hand from the continuation of both jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space between each incision is the quantity of three digits, adjust it.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a sponge prepared with dry rags with which to absorb the blood.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	Then insert the spatula of two acute ends, of which this is the form of its incision:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	that is from the part of the temples into the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Excavate with that all the gum which is between two incisions with the chisel which is on top of the bone, and then do the same with the middle incision into the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	Then place that spatula and insert it into the first incision again, but this time use another instrument called a cutellar, which is sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And place the side of that sharp one against the gum attached to the bone, and the other side against the tooth, and push it in until you reach the middle incision, and cut with it all the vessels which descend from the head to the jaw.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	Let the incision continue until it reaches the gum, and then do the same in the middle incision into the other incision.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And when blood has flowed in equal quantity from both sides, squeeze out the places of congealed blood.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	Then place in each incision a piece of cotton wool, and place over it powdery paste made with wine vinegar and oil, and bandages so that an ulcer will not form by cauterization.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day loosen the ligature and administer copious poultices of warm water or tea, and then treat it with basilicon ointment made with rose oil and others so that the wounds heal.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5:
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	Of the treatment of ulcers with cauteries and the jaws which descend from the parts inside the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When to someone come cauteries and they continue, and you see the jaw of the patient emaciated little, and the care of them is weakened, and the eyelids are ulcerated and from them hair has fallen, and in the forehead there is acute pain and consequent tension, then know through these accidents that the matters and cauteries do not come except from small vessels which proceed from inside.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best cure for these is this: command the patient to shave his forehead, and then cut an incision in the middle of the forehead, a little according to its breadth (and begin with the incision of the left temple into the right temple; and let it be an incision into the bone; and lengthen your hand from the eyelids of the temples which are mauled because of chewing), so that the bone is uncovered.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Absorb all blood with a sponge or dry cloth and then fill between the two lips of the incision with old cotton wool or with poultice.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	Then bandage it with powdery paste made with wine vinegar and oil so that an ulcer will not form by cauterization.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you loosen it and see that the ulcer has already diminished, then know that the bone is rubbed where it begins in the native flesh of the jaw, and then cure it with an astringent regimen which makes the flesh dry, just as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of rosin and mix them, and from this make plaster and administer it to these wounds.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter 6:
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	Of the treatment of that which cauterizes in the ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	The cause of cauterization in the ears is one of four things: either mineral stone or something similar to stone, like iron and glass, or it is from plants like chickpeas and beans, or it is volatile like water and wine and their likenesses, or some animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And therefore when stone cauterizes in the ear or other similar cause of those causes which do not form a callus in the ear, and hang the ear to the sun, and if you see the stone, then distill into it some cause of oil of violets or sesame, and then administer its extraction, and make it sneeze with snuff, and stop up the nostril from the activity of sneezing.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	Then place in the circumference of the ear some pieces of cloth or wool, and extend the ear to its parts above, for many times it is perforated with these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not perforated, then administer its extraction with the instrument called an epicyclic subtile whose form is this:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it is perforated with the gesti, well and good; but if not, then administer its extraction with a subtle hook of slight doubling.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And therefore if it is not perforated by that, then make a cannula of bronze and insert the end of the cannula into the hole in the ear and close around the cannula with wax and softened oil so that nothing but the cannula comes out.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And then extract it with your own hand with strong traction, for many times it is dragged along with that which we have recounted.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	But if it is not perforated in this manner, then take alum or hollow brass prepared with which the ears are pressed with a little quantity, and place that on the end of the jaw, and then wrap around it decently a bandage placed.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	Then insert that into the hole in the ear with ease, and then dry the ear of moisture.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And therefore if it is not perforated with all the causes which we have recounted, then you cut short that in front so that it does not form an ulcer by cauterization or spasm.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the manner of cutting it short is that at the beginning you cause to flow in the ear of the vein of the sephasic vein and extract the blood according to the manner of its nature, and then make it sneeze between your hands and turn the ear to its parts above, and finish with a small incision in the root of the ear from the gray matter of it in the place which is pressed by it.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And let the incision be in the shape of the moon so that it reaches the stone, and when the stone is found, push it out with appropriate instruments; then close up the incision at that time with speed, and cure it so that it heals.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause which cauterizes in the ear is one of the gums which grows and inflates, then administer its cure and extraction; but if it does not obey your command, then take a subtle hook according to this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	and administer with that the incision of that gum which is fallen in the ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not do that when you think that it is already moistened by the vapor of the ear, and place that in many pieces, and then extract those with pins or with a subtle hook, or by incision as we have said before, for the extraction of it is delayed.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	But in the water which is entered into the ear when the patient sneezes at the beginning, and fills his own ear with some old cotton wool, and put on that ear in which there is the water, and if by this it is perforated, well and good; but if not, then take thin pieces of stone and lean them according to its length, and heat those in the fire a little, and let the patient insert one of those into the hole of his ear and suck on one of that part and press with another stone over the stone which is inside the ear.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Therefore, do not stop until all the water has been drained out.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc .i., e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And once the water has been drained, you can use paper or linen to place one end in the ear and extend the other end with fire until it is burnt.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And then place another piece of linen and do this as many times until all the water has been drained, and then apply the stone extractor as previously described.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	But if a foreign object is stuck in the ear and it's small, use a pair of tweezers to remove it as described earlier for a stone. However, if the cause is something large and lodged deep inside the ear canal, then use forceps or similar tools. The cause of this is usually a bee or something similar that got stuck in the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	But if the cause is a worm that has grown inside the ear, and you have treated it as described in the section on distillation without success, then you should examine the ear in sunlight.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if you see any sign of the worm, then remove it with forceps or a thin, pointed instrument. But if there are no signs of a worm, take a cannula that is narrow at one end and wider at the other, which should look like this:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	Insert the narrow end into the ear according to how much pain the patient can tolerate. Then, create a strong suction with your mouth and do this several times until all the worms are removed.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	But if the patient does not cooperate, then close off one end of the cannula with wax as described earlier. Then, administer distillation remedies that have already been mentioned in the treatment of worms and you will find them in the section on distillation.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And use this instrument to pour your medicinal oils into the ear, which should look like this:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	Make the spout out of silver or lead, narrow at the bottom and wider on top with a small hole in it.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And then place the oil inside the container so that it stays in the spout as needed.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you want, take the rod and wrap it with cotton at one end, then pour oil into the cavity of the ear, or sap from herbs, or any of these medicines in the cannula —and insert the rod with the cotton end first and squeeze it with your hand to release the medicine into the cavity of the ear so that the patient can feel the medicine inside.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And what has been put in the ear should already be warmed by fire a little.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And be careful that the cause you are treating in the ear is not too warm because ear medicine does not tolerate heat well.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter 7:
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	On the treatment of ear infections.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Some children are born with a hernia in their belly button that does not heal, and this also happens to some adults, an infection in the middle of the ear drum or from a wound in the outer part of the ear; and this infection sometimes occurs in the membrane of the eardrum, and sometimes in the external parts.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And the one that occurs in the drum, which does not involve the eardrum, is more difficult to heal.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And when you manage to get the eardrum involved, make sure that the patient faces the sun and examine it.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if you see any swelling, open it with a thin spatula, which should look like this:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	The end of the spatula should be narrow and one side pointed while the other is not, and it should have two edges that do not cut into the ear drum.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And if the infection is caused by flesh grown in the ear or in the middle of it, then remove it with a thin instrument and cut it off aggressively so that all the flesh is removed.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the infection is in the drum of the ear, take a thin rod made of lead and heat it slightly, then insert it into the middle of the ear.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And if you feel any swelling with something that the patient feels easily due to pressure, relieve that pressure easily; and make sure not to irritate the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then place a piece of linen in the ear according to the size of the opening you have made with the Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure that the wound has healed; or take some cotton and soak it in vinegar and sprinkle it on the wound, then use this to dress the wound. And if you see that the ear drum is already formed, then remove the old dressing and replace it with new one that you have soaked in rosin oil so that the wound will heal quickly. Then treat the patient until he is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	But if there is blood flow, then soak a sponge or piece of linen in cold water and place it over the ear; and use the other treatment that restricts blood flow which is mentioned in the section on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 8:
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	On the treatment of athezil that affects the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Athezil that affects the eyelids of the eyes sometimes has a moist appearance, and sometimes it is dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Therefore, take them off with tweezers or a pointed instrument, and cut them with the edge of the spatula, then place it over the affected area.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	But if there is pain with blood flow, then cauterize them with a small, thin pointed instrument.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cauterization is when you cut them and pull them out several times after removing any cause of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burnt and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter 9:
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	On the treatment of grandeyssa that affects the eyelids of the eyes.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Many times it occurs in the eyelids of the eyes due to some cause that is similar to grandeyssa in its strength and hardness, and because of this, grandeyssa is named.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And it is an accumulation of thick moisture under the eyelid and above it.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	And its appearance is that you should examine if the grandeyssa is coming from under the eyelid and is raised in all directions; and the cause of it is coldness.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Then make an incision along the length of it and then scrape it from all sides so that it can drain, and then close it with a needle and cut it off.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	But if you are not equipped to make an incision and do not want to puncture the eyelid just a little, then this will not notice any cause.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the wound is large, then you should stitch it and treat it until it is healed.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it's small, it won't get worse because the eye will restore it and heal it.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the grandeyssa is declining towards the inner sides of the eyelid, then cut off the outer part and pull it; another that you should not cut off the edge of it, and press all around it, and if the eyelid is stretched by incision, then this will not notice any cause.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	Then, after the incision, wash the eye with salted water; and treat the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	Of the cure of a ulcer on the eyelid above the eye.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	A ulcer is gray in color and is generated in the membranes of the eyelid above, and mostly affects infants, harming their sight and causing tears to them. And they cannot see the brightness of the sun because of this.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And because of this, you will see them wiping their faces all the time, and sleeping on their faces; and if you press the area with your fingers, you will feel swelling within them. And when you wet the eyelids of these people, inflammation and a bulge become apparent in the eye; and when you wet the area, you can feel the bulge within them.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And there is another way of operating on this condition when the patient rests his head in your lap, and you place a cloth over him and make him warm, and then draw a circle around him according to how much space he contains all around, and then place that over the affected area and press with your fingers all around so that the inflammation is drawn into the center of the circle. Then open up the moisture with a spatula by making an incision along the length, but not larger than the incision made in flabotomy.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	But in the lower part of the eyelid, be careful not to cut into the tendon all the way through so as not to reach the inflammation, because in most cases the inflammation comes through the incision along the length according to the shape of a white line.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Then remove it with cloths which you have wrapped between your fingers at the edges, and move it around between your right and left hand until it is dispersed.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And be careful not to push into the eye with the spatula, lest you damage the eye while doing this.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	But if you do not see inflammation at the beginning of the incision, but see it within the incision, then push a little into the incision with your spatula so that the inflammation comes out; and then remove it as we have said; and then wet the area with water and wine and place bandages over it.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And if any pus is left in the cavity of the incision, then put salt and bread into the incision to soak up that moisture.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then care for it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	But if an ulcer develops at the site of cauterization, then cure that with mild poultices until it is healed.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	Of ways of treating eye disorders.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When the eyelids of the eyes become swollen due to inflammation caused by the natural hairs growing downward and becoming entangled, this causes eye disorders characterized by excessive tears, inflammation of the eyelids and tissues, which can lead to destruction of the eye, and is treated in four ways: either by cauterization with fire; or with a sharp instrument as described in the chapter on cautery; or by incision and suturing; or by using canes as I will describe.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	Now, place the patient's head in your lap; then lift up the eyelid of the eye with your left hand, and if it is lifted, that is good; otherwise, insert a needle into the part where you see pus below the eyelid, and push the needle upwards beyond the margin of the eyelid, close to where the hairs are growing downward, and pull the pus out towards the top of the eyelid, and convert the eyelid with your thumb.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	Then open up the part within the eyelid beneath the entangled hairs with a spatula inserted into the tear duct of the upper tear duct; then remove the pus and place small pieces of cotton or cloth below the eyelid, and then bind the eyelid with a bandage, and let it remain as if it were a leaf of myrtle.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	But the shape should be according to the amount of swelling of the eyelid, because this varies among people; for some it is necessary that a large amount be removed from the eyelid, according to how much the eyelid is swollen.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	Then open up with the spatula along the two lines which you have marked, and begin at the tear duct of the upper tear duct.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your incision is close to the natural hairs as it should be, then cut off the grosstude.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	Then insert the hook in one of the two angles of the pouch, and then scrape away all that which is within; and then pull the two edges together with a suture or with thread made of fine wool, and wipe away the blood, and attach what hangs over the two eyelids by some means, if you want to do so, or else do not cure it.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	Then let the suture of the eyelids be for three days or four, and then care for it.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you want, remove the bandage after the suturing, and care for it with something that dries and draws together, because the eyelid is raised due to the sealing of the bandage and the collection of fluids; but suturing is better. Therefore, I have told you these ancient remedies.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	But it should be done gently on the patient, and it is a good operation, and there is no cause for fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	There is another way of treating it, and that is to make on the eyelid a figure like a leaf of myrtle, and then lift up the eyelid with three nails separated and gathered together according to this shape:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	But if it is not possible to do this, and the nails are not available, then take a needle with thread and insert that into the center of the figure, and push the other end towards the upper tear duct; and then pull on the nails so that they gather together equally, and then with your thumb, lift up your hand with an equal lifting action, and lift up all the pouch over which you have made the mark as we have recommended.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then pull together the two edges of the bandage with a suture, and care for it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	But if an ulcer develops due to your incision or your opening, then treat that ulcer with ointment and something similar, and with bandages.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And if the eyelids are ever inverted due to the entangled hairs, then use what we have said about incision; but suturing in each case is more artificial.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	Treating it with canes is done like this:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	And it is that you lift up the eyelid and split the figure which is within according to what I have described; then with skill, make two canes or two slender sticks whose length is according to the length of the eyelid and whose width is less than the width of a spatula.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have already split at the ends of some of the parts where you have threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Then gather each one with subtlety below what is surplus of the eyelid of the eye, and tie the canes at some parts with strong binding, and let it remain for several days; because the pouch will die and become blackened and fall off due to the tightness.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	But if it is delayed, then cut it with scissors, and then care for the bandage until it is healed.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	Then when it is solidified, the eyelid will be raised and the hairs will not poke.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the way of making two canes like this:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and have the amount of length and width neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter 12.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	Of lifting up hairs that poke into the eye with a needle when the hair is hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When they are by non-natural hairs, hard and rough and pungent the roots, then the operation on him is that you take a subtle needle and place it in that veil of fine linen and lion, and then that you attach the extremities of it and nuts each in a very subtle way.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And let the length of the veils be the quantity of a palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And then you lay another subtle veil beneath him quickly, and tie the extremities of that if you wish to.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And then place the patient's head in your lap, and be near the sun so that your work is revealed, for it is a subtle and minute operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And then insert the needle at the root of the hair that needs treatment, and make it penetrate the eyelid quickly while extracting it above the natural hair.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And then pull the hair out from above and insert that into the eye, and let there be one or two or three hairs, and not more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And then pull your hand away so that the hair is withdrawn with the eyelid with the natural hair.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	But if it is pulled out and the hair is not extracted, pull out the eyelid at its edges with the veil which you have composed with that, so that in being extracted, the eyelid comes out over the natural hair.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And you wash that with the vision of the eye, for then you will take out the eyelid and the veil, and let them heal each and close the eye for two or three days, until the hair sticks to its place and grows above good flesh.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if it is longer, then you attach a long hair of the natural hairs, and it is elevated with that, or you insert it so that it is drawn up by some space, and then you elevate that.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter .XIII.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	Of the cure of a hunchback which comes on the eyelid above.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When there is hunchback in the eye, and it is contraction of the eyelid when it is contracted on its own, or to the right or left side, by bad consolidation of plague or incision or cautery, and this hunchback, or it is natural or accidental, and it is made by consolidation of plague or incisions or cautery, or by similar to them badly treated.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The way of the operation on him is that you split that consolidation and separate its lips, and place in him in what is between a piece of linen thread, and tie those so that they heal.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And do not think that you use treatment of him from the causes which dry out; for if you do that, hunchback returns worse than at any time there was before.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use in that of causes which soften as it is fenugreek, and mix with the water in which there are altae and seed of li, or ointment of diaquilon, which shall be liquefied by some of the oils, and submerge in that the piece, and cure with that.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the treasure of your cure is that you pierce with all skill that is not consolidated according to the form it was at the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation which we have said is not anything but a rectification of ehalixacrati that does not return the form of the place according to what it was before.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter .XIV.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	Of the cure of hunchback which is made in the eyelid below.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This hunchback which is made in the eyelid below, which is named veritably hunchback; and it is of him some natural, other accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	But accidental is made by plague or incision or cautery or by others similar.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	And the way of the operation on him is that you take a needle in which there is double thread, and put that into the flesh, and make it pass from the tear duct of left to the tear duct of right, so that the thread comes out in both ends of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	And then stretch the flesh at the edges above with the needle and sew that with the needle, and insert it with ample spatula.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And so if the shape of the eyelid returns according to how it should be, it is good; and if not, take the needle and pause that in the split shape, and with that convert the eyelid, and split the two fissures on the sides of the eyelid below.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And let the ends of the two fissures be of two angles of the incision, which you have made so that they meet, and let an angle be made of them when they come together, and a figure be made of them.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is Greek letter: the land.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And then stop the flesh that by the quantity it is the side of him acute below of him, that binds the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then attach the separated parts and sew those with the thread of wool; and then cure those with what we have said of the medicines softening and of the leeches so that it is healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if hunchback comes through incision or suture or cautery, then you must split with a flat incision over the hairs of the eyelid according to what is preceded.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And then separate with the leech between two lips according to what we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the sum of the speech of the cure of hunchback when it is above or below, that the operation runs on him, according to how it is prepared in the form of hunchback, and that is in form of many different things.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the wise artisans always prepare skill in every way that is possible for him so that he makes the figure return to the natural form, or close to it, and the patient according to what suits him of the operation and the instruments in the greatest dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter .XV.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	Of the adhesion of the eyelid with the conjunctiva or with the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation happens to many men so that the eyelid is adhered more above with the white of the eye, and it is prohibited from the facility of movement and its natural works, then you must insert the outer edge below the eyelid, and lift it up there, or stretch it out with the finger.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And then you insert the adhesion with a subtle spatula, which is not sharp at the edges, have a little blunt so that the patient is not troubled after the operation, and remove the spatula so that it does not hurt the eye by its acuteness.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And let your incision split that adhesion with facility so that the eyelid returns according to its natural form, and all the adhesion is healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And then put in the eye salted water with which you wash it; or distill in it wine dissolved in the water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And then separate between the eyelid and the eye with a leech of li, and pause over the eye wool soaked in white of egg, and then on the third day use causes consolidating so that it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter .XVI.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	Of incision of nail and of prominence of flesh of the tear ducts.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Know that nail is according to two ways, for it is nervous, and is similar to hard thin ciphac; or it is non-nervous, similar to white humidity congealed, which when the iron touches it, or is forced, takes on a horn, is cut off and the horn is not put in him.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both species do not begin unless from the major tear duct as it goes little by little covering the sight and forbid light and the movement of eye.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	But the way of working in the incision of him is that the patient pauses his head in your lap, and then open his eyes, and lift up the eyelid with your hand, and then collect the nail with horn of little duplication, and stretch it to the edges above.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	Then take a needle and pierce it with a horsehair or ox hair, or the like, or with strong twine, doubling the end of the needle little by little and thrusting it into the middle of the nail, piercing it with the needle, and binding it with twine; draw it to the upper parts, and with the hair scrape the sides of the nail which close up the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And thus you will follow it with the hair to his back.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And then insert the remainder into the root of the tear duct with a delicate spatula or with small forceps, and cut the flesh of the natural tear duct so that through this incision it does not cause continuous flow of tears.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And sometimes the nail is extended with salt or twine, as we have said, and then it is scraped with a lion's tooth spatula, of which this is its form:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And beware of touching the cornea with the spatula and causing rupture in it, and that the pupil be perforated.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Then throw a little powdered salt or vinegar made from wine into the hole and let it remain until the next day; and then heal that with water that covers it so that it may be cured.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot put the needle into it or pierce it with the twine, then this kind of nail is cured by medicines, and is healed thus as the eye, and also made whole in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to split it, then open the hole of the patient and take a lion' s-tooth spatula, sharpened according to this form:
am subtilitat.	with subtlety.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if you see that it is rarefied and drawn in and the root is affected, then distill from your mouth into the hole vinegar made of wine or with red wine or with powdered salt, and close up the hole until the next day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat the operation on it until everything is taken from it; unless that, in contrast, a wound cauterization is in the hole, for then you cut into it and heal the wound at its beginning so that it may be cured.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat your operation on it with reason until it is cured.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The membrane of the tear duct, if noticed in the hole by great injury, is suspended with twine; and insert that from that one part, and do not finish the incision so that it does not cause flow of tears.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And then distill into the tear duct red wine and vinegar made of wine until it is cured.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter 17.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	Of incision of aulacero and of what has been born from flesh pressed into the hole.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Sometimes in the holes of the eye there is born red flesh, and it is superimposed so that it covers the pupil, or it approaches or draws near upon the eyelids and strongly compresses the eyelids to the parts outside and is attached to the bulbar conjunctiva.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	And the operation in him is that the patient places his head on your lap; and then open the holes of him and collect all that flesh with convenient tongs for that, and you do that with a forceps or basket; and then split the flesh at the beginning so that everything is finished by the incision, and beware of the hole that you do not scorch it through your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And your incision is with which you pierce those or with the spatula which we have recommended in the incision of the nail, or with small forceps with which it is gathered ash-gray according to its form: see this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Therefore when your incision is finished and all that flesh is drawn out, then fill the hole with powdered salt, or distill into it red powder and something like the medicines that are caustic, and place over the hole outside a bandage made of egg white so that it is secured from cauterization.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if for some cause aulacero occurs and there is danger of cauterization wound, and you fear cauterization wound, then cut the hole and heal that wound with what makes that wound, and then repeat on it the operation until it is cured, and similarly do in the flesh that presses into the hole which causes this kind.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	But indeed you should prevent all cure of the hole by natural or accidental way, working with iron, and not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that this member has suffered that operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter 18.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	Of collection of ash-gray in the hole.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Ash-gray veins are red which are tested upon the hole and forbid its operation, and they draw out the hole over a period of days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore it is necessary at the beginning that you consider if the hole in which ash-gray is strong and in it there is not another illness other than ash-gray, then you collect that ash-gray.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And it is that you command the patient to place his head on your lap, and then suspend those veins with one or two tongs according to your prudence; and let that tong be of subtle doubling according to this form:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or two tongs gradually in one body according to this form:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And then let those veins be collected with subtle forceps, with subtlety, and wipe the blood hour by hour, until you see that those veins are drawn out of the hole and are rolled up.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And beware of scorching the hole with the tip of the spatula; and if your operation is in the middle before the sun, and be steady in your operation that you do not pierce except those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have finished, then you distill into the hole red wine or vinegar so that with its sharpness it corrode what has been drawn out of the ash-gray.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	But if it is not possible for you to collect it all in that hour, then you plaster it all with what makes his pain go away, and let him for several days until his pain is eased and it is secured from cauterization wound.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat on it in the same way that the hand was healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the form of the forceps:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter 19.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	Of reduction of hernia to the nose.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you cure arisati by cauterization or with acute medicine burning according to what is preceded by its description and it is not cured, then there is no fire in him except that you split over the wound because of the maturity of it, and draw out all the humidity which is in him and the pus until its bone is uncovered.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And therefore when the bone is uncovered and you see in it corruption or blackness, then scrape it with a tool of which this is the form:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And it is named from rough head, and let its tip be iron, and let the head be round so that it scrapes the which is frayed by piercing with file or sharpened with a pointed file (so that it is in the following form).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And place that over the corroded location of the bone, and then roll that between your fingers, and compress your hand little by little until you know that the corruption is scraped.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And let that be done several times, and then restore the location with astringent and styptic causes.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	Therefore if the location is consolidated and good flesh has grown on it and the body of the wound has separated and there is no discharge or accident in it, then you know that it is cured.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	But if not, then there is no fire in it except to reduce the crack to the form of the nose, and according to this way: let you scrape according to bone with iron or with acute medicine, and when the bone is uncovered, then take tinder according to this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	Let the end of his foot be triangularized, and let the shin of the foot be pulled out straight as well.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	And then place that [the needle] on the bone, and let it be near to the tear; and lengthen your hand a little from the elbow, and then revolve your hand with the thread inside, so that it penetrates all of the bone, and that the patient feels the pain through as you draw out the breath through his mouth.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Then, restore the site with astringent medicines that dry up just like you have healed it.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	And when the meat and the site has become hardened, then the matter that was flowing from the orifices returns to the nose, therefore here is where the pus is on the patient.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20:
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	On reducing the prominence of the elbow.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the elbow protrudes in its entirety and does not occur with harm nor decrease in movement, then open up the patient, and then what follows is that you make a cautery on the neck by the scarification and sucking by good suction; and then place liniment on the elbow which is made of pitch, aloe, honey, and myrrh, and then tighten the bandage over the elbow with soft powder.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the way of making the powders is to take dry woolen rags and double each rag into four folds; and make with that.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And then place those one on top of another according to the quantity of which it has the elbow necessity.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And then tighten over that with a hard cloth by strong compression; and repeat the suction by sucking without scarification; and then remove the suction and let the elbow be tight during the day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	But if in between the ligament has become soft, then let it be very tight.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And then remove the bandage during the day and night as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that the elbow has been reduced, good, and if not, then repeat the bandage with the powders and compression and the suction until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21:
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	On the incision of the prominence of the venous tunica.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When a disruption occurs in the venous tunica and it is prominent and protrudes out from the eyelids like a grain of sand, and its shape resembles that of man by it, and you want to operate on it, then the operation on him is as we have mentioned: you insert the needle into the vein at the part below in the part above, and then insert the other needle in which there is a thread doubled at the part of the tear, and make that penetrate and let the first needle be according to its disposition; and then incise the site of the double vein and lift up with it the part of the tunica by the circuit of the needle and tighten it.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	And then remove the needle and place over the elbow wool infused in egg white and let it be until the thread falls down with the vein.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then cure the elbow with that which comforts it until the wound is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And sometimes gather from all parts with a circle of cloth around the elbow by the prominent eminence greatly, and then it is perforated by the spatula sutilly so that the white humidity flows and the elbow descends and in the meantime.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And then tighten until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22:
De curacio de alconati.	On the cure of a hawk.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This illness which is called Alconati is not anything other than a boil which is adjusted in the elbow similar to water and is not that.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	But the way of operating on it is that you make the patient sit upright and straight, and then take the head in your hands from two parts and hold him so that you see the boil coming out to the parts below, and then let it be dried up and not descend, and the light is obscured, and the patient sees the causes as he would.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not go down, know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	But if it is not prepared for the descending of the boil by what we have said, then make the patient sit between your hands and then take a spatula sutilly and fen over that on the covering of the eyeball a little from the continuation of the conjunctiva with the tunica cornea in the corona (in the eye socket) so that the boil is pushed out.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	And then when it is pushed out, then you distill into the elbow water tail in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have boiled fenugreek and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then let it be cured with the other causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 23:
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	On the cure of water descending from the elbow.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already said about the species of water in division and which one convenes to pierce with a needle according to the health.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Then make him sit between your hands over a chair and tie up his elbow tightly.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And then place near to the eyelid of his elbow your left hand, if the elbow in which there is the water is the left one; or with your right hand, if it is the right one.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And then take up the needle, if it is the left one; or with your other hand, if it is the right one.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And then place the end of the needle near to the crown by the thickness of the membrane in the white of the eye on the side of the lesser tear, and pierce the needle with force and revolve your hand with that.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And then penetrate into the white of the eye and feel that the needle has already come to the visible cause.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And let it be the distance of the path of the needle to the front by the measure of the space which is from the pupil in to the end of the blackness, and it is the crown of the eye; for you will see with that the pupil through the vision of the eye by the clarity of the tunica cornea.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And then place the needle into the site in which there is the water, and then you draw it down a little and another, and therefore if the water descends at once, then see the patient on whose eye he breaks his vision at once, and the needle in the elbow.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And then rest a little; therefore if the water has been drawn out, then you draw that other one before the needle is withdrawn.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And then when it is dried up and has not descended, then you withdraw the needle with ease, and revolve your hand a little by little, and then dissolve in the water a little of clear salt of gemma and wash the inside of the elbow; and then place outside the elbow a bandage or stop or wool infused in rose oil and egg white over that the elbow.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	But us and those who are of our time to place over it combed with egg white.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it does not yield to you the needle at the instrument of the eye by its hardness — for it is the bone of which the elbow is hard —, then let it be that you take the spatula which is called alberid of which this is the shape:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And then pierce with that the conjunction, and do not finish your hand at the thrust, and it is not if you make passage to the needle subtle site.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And then insert the needle as we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And when you have finished your work, let the patient be prepared for a descending sleep made in which he sleeps on his side in a dark room, and there is prohibited of all movements.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And place him in nature so that it is cooled his nature, and not turn his head to the right or left in any way.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And let the ligature remain in place for the third day according to its position.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And then untie it in that dark spot and expose the sore sight, and let him see some causes, and then return the ligature on the seventh day.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And don't do this during the time of cure or immediately after the infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	You have to ensure that it's removed so that the water can easily pass through with great force and vigilance.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	But if an abscess occurs, then untie the wound before the seventh day, and rectify that with something that reduces the abscess.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Then you open his eyes and place on his face a poultice that he should be treated with for several days, existing in the dark spot.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And then let him walk gradually and converse about his causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And know that in some cases it is not excused for the disciple of vision to see some things, and then you should be careful about the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And it has come to us from some of those who are in the Artach , and some say that fire is made in the Ayrac by a perforated Magdaam through which water is sucked.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	But I haven't seen it done in our land, nor have I read about it in any of the ancient books; and it's possible that this is new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of the spices with which one should work on those who ignore them:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And they are made of iron or steel properly, and their ends are shaped with this triangular subtlety, the acute end just like that is the shape.
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter .XXIV.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	Of the cure of a wound in the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When in the nose there are various meats growing tightly attached to which is some cause that is assembled with the sting of a fly, or of a polyp, and this malady is called polypus because it resembles that fly represented.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And from it is cancerous meat, lumpy, of dusky colour; and from it is that is not leonine meat of dusky colour.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore in that which is in these leonine meats not fraudulent or cancerous, let the patient hold his hand over the sun, and open his nose, and prick with a needle the tip of his finger into those meats.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And then extract that to the parts of the foramen, and burn what you have understood from those with a pointed needle in the one part into which you know that all the meat is removed; if something remains in him of the cause of which the abscission is possible, then you treat it with one of the subtle instruments with ease so that nothing remains in him.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	But if it bleeds or an abscess occurs, then you give to him something that he should drink; or if it is of the malignant abscesses, then you cut and cauterize that so that blood is shed and all the cavities are removed.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And then let him drink in the nose after the incision wine or water or wine.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	But if the nose is open and from it there proceeds moisture into the palate, then know that it has healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	But if the moisture does not penetrate as you know, then you know that inside him is meat gone bad in the pustules of the nose to which no abscission has come.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Therefore let you put bile in it to which there is some thickness, and in him make words with words, and place between each nut the quantity of the said or less, and turn the patient and place one end of the bile in the nose with the ray or with another cause that is possible to him.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And when he has done this, let him breathe in his odour to the channels of the nose, and it should come out over his throat, for troops of sights appear to those who do this action, and it is a slight cause to him that wants to do it.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	And then place the two ends of the bile, one end that goes out over the nose and the other that goes in, and administer a cut of meat with the words that are in the bile, and do this so that you know that the meats already are in the words of the bile.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	And then extract the bile, and put in the nose after the abstraction of blood a cold poultice, and do this for three days or more so that the gum corrode all that which remains of the meats.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And then at the end of the cause, put in the nose a lead cannula for several days until it has healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	But if you see that it needs more cure, use that.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the instrument for cleansing the nose, from which oils and medicines are distilled into the nose:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And do this with silver or iron, which should be like a small open lamp, just like a little pot, and the meat similarly.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you want, make a closed cannula like a reed, and the cannula of the instrument for cleansing the nose is flat and uncovered; to which there should be a handle at its end with which you hold it when you pour into it oil or that which you want of the sucks and of the causes sucking.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And these are precious cleansing instruments: take castoreum, white balsam, ginger, long pepper, asafetida, opoponax, and strix of a hen's egg, one ounce. Wine with juice of bled and of cauld, and let the pills be made, and let a pill be tempered with water of tebeza, and let it be dropped in the nose of the patient sitting upright.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter .XXV.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	Of the holes in the ends of the nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Many times it happens that a hole is made in the ends of the nose, and it is swollen and swollen for several days until something is seen in it.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And for this let you insert that into the beginning of his appearance, and treat all that entirely.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	And then place over the spot a cautery or burning medicine which is in the location.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	But if its opening is delayed until it has become swollen, then consider whether it is suppurated, hard, of dusky colour and of little feeling, then do not touch it with iron because this is a suppurative abscess; for many times it happens that he who inserts this abscess into that from which there was.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the abscess is leonine and not of dusky colour, and its opening is possible in all that, then empty the patient and insert that without fear, and treat the spot with what comes out and bind it closely so that it has healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter .XXVI.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	Of the sewing of the nose and of the lips and of the ears when the continuity is dissolved by pus or by like.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	Know that when there is a solution of continuity in one of these cartilages, there are few who confer in that operation but some men.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore let you, when for any cause of those, consider whether it is pus fresh with your blood, and then join the two lips of the pus with a suture, and then treat that so that it has healed.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the lips of solution of continuity are already separated and each is healed, then let you cut each of its visible cords in which there appears blood.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then join the two lips with a suture and strengthen those, and over them powder blood of dragon's blood and cut up into three parts, and place over the powder a piece of emplaster diafinicon or of another one of the emploasters that consolidate, and let him lie so for two days or for three, and then release him and change the emplaster and let him lie so that the wounds are closed by themselves, and then treat with ointment so that it has healed.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	But the method of suturing is that you add the solution of continuity or needles as we have recommended in the suturing of the abdomen, or add the solution of continuity with gallbladder as you and made known.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	Of the extraction of those causes that come between the two lips in parts inside.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Many times therefore many men in the parts inside their lips have some apoplectic ulcers hard resembling fat of worms, and some are smaller and some are larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Therefore you should turn the lips inside out and cut each of those hard places all around, then make an incision in the swollen part where the blood is constricted, then wash it with a pleasant wine and cure the place with something that causes constriction until it heals.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	Of incision of the flesh tight in the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Frequently there is a growth of flesh tight to the gum which the ancients call albus, therefore if you suspend that with tweezers or something you have, and cut it at its root, letting the pus or blood run out.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	Then place on the incised part some other astringent or caustic powder.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if that flesh returns, then cut it again secondly and cauterize it, for by cauterizing it will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	Of reason of teeth with iron.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When in the surface of the teeth of the inside parts and of the hole and between the gums are tight rough scars, hard, and some times they are black and they are made yellow or green inside, through which comes corruption to the gum, and the teeth are made hard.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And therefore you should make the patient open his mouth and place his head in your lap, then press the teeth where those scars appear, and remove them as if they were sand so that no cause remains within, doing this the blackness and yellowing and others are cured until they are healed.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	And if this is what is at the beginning of the cause, it is good; but if not, then you repeat the remedy on those every other day and on the second and third until it comes to the final state which you want.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And know that teeth have many needs of various remedies of diverse forms and of many figures according to your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And therefore the razor with which the tooth is cut from the inside part is different from the razor with which it is cut between the teeth according to other forms; and you ought to prepare these razors as you will see immediately:
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	Of uprooting of teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	That you cure the tooth of its pain with every art and delay in total uprooting of it, for there is no cause that surpasses the growth of it when it is uprooted, for it is a sublime substance which is an obstacle to its uprooting.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	But if the patient is forced to have that tooth uprooted, you must be certain which is the painful tooth, for many times the pain deceives the patient and seems to be in a healthy tooth, and you uproot it and yet the pain does not cease until the diseased tooth is uprooted, for we have seen this by operation of the gums.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Therefore when you are certain which is the painful tooth, and know well, then cut around the circuit of the tooth with a spatulate instrument in which there is some virtue, until it is dissolved from the gum all around, then pull it with your fingers or with subtle forceps little by little until you draw it out.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And therefore grab it strongly with strong tongs or hold it well between your fingers so that you do not harm it, and draw the tooth according to rectitude in manner that you do not break it, nor give great pain to the patient.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And therefore if it is not loose, then take one of those instruments and place it underneath it all around with facility and exert force on removing it in the same way as before.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	But if the tooth is split or rotten, then take a piece of cloth and fill that split and tighten it with a wire at its extreme with a subtle ray so that it is not broken in the time of your constriction on it with tongs.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And take care to cut around the circuit of all parts of the gum and guard your strength so that you do not break it and tear a part from it, then return on the patient for the malice that he may be major that the first pain of him.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And take care that you do not do as some ignorant barbers do in their audacity on the uprooting of them, not administering what we have recommended; for often they bring great diseases upon men which are difficult to be tied, and their roots are all wrinkled, or some of those, or that you draw it out with some bones from the jaw as we have sometimes witnessed.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And therefore let the uprooting of it be washed in the mouth with warm wine or vinegar with salt.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if then blood flows from there, as it often does, take some quantity of alder and sprinkle on the wound, and if that alder does not help, cauterize.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The form of the tongs and forceps subtle with which the tooth is drawn at the beginning should be of long length, with short and thick handle, so that they are not bent when you operate with them.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And they should be of such thickness of handle that when you strain on them they are not bent, they are short lengths.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And they are made of iron of India descendingly made of straight lengths, and in the ends of those there are teeth of which some enter into others and strain by strong constriction, and sometimes the ends of those are the form of a duck's beak which is hooked, it is bent, and are of strong constriction.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXXI.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	Of uprooting of teeth and extraction of the bones from the jaw.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you need to uproot a tooth which is tied, then take some cause, then place on the spot a poultice with wool for one or two days until the place is softened; and then insert a hook or tongs in the ends of which are joined together like a beak of a duck called ciconia, or bent, the form of the forceps:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The ends of them are made inside like a lime or file.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if it does not obey your command with these forceps or tongs, then cut around the root and remove all the flesh and insert the instrument which is called atali, which is a small lever of which the form is this:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And it is of short length thick, and not bent so that it is not tied.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	Therefore if by this the root is loose, it is good; but if not, help yourself with these other instruments of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is triangular length in which there is some thickness: the form of the second instrument is circular length in which there is some thickness;
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The form of the second instrument is that it is triangular and more subtle end.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And now you are helped with this instrument having two ramps of which this is the form, then the following:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	And other instruments which will be used for tooth extraction; because it is made with this instrument that resembles an onion in size, and this is its form:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	With a bent or curved triangular end, which should be somewhat thick and not sharp enough to break.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And other tools that are used for tooth extraction are similar to the other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	But the wise and subtle artisans in the art find for themselves matters according to what the operation and various illnesses indicate to them; because there are illnesses that the ancients did not name nor use specific instruments for due to their various forms.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the jawbone or other bones in the mouth are broken, or if there is pain, then it should be treated on the spot with what is convenient from the instruments and forceps that we have described for tooth extraction, and use the gesture whose form is as follows:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And let there be some thickness to it little by little, and let it be pressed or held in the mouth so that it does not escape or move until the bone is completely healed; then restore the area with appropriate medicines for this purpose.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if there is a small wound in the bone, then scrape away that wound and its darkness, and cure it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	Of the treatment of teeth that stick out above the others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When teeth stick out and do not follow their natural course, especially in women and particularly in old people, you should consider this: if the tooth does not touch another tooth and is not possible to file or draw it back, then you must cut that tooth; but if it is attached to another tooth, then you must insert this instrument into it, whose form is as follows; it is similar to a pig's snout, and it should be made of Indian iron with an acute end.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And you must make the incision through which you will insert it into that tooth for several days according to the hardness of the tooth, and so that none of the other teeth are damaged.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the prominent tooth is exposed to abrasion, then file it with an Indian iron file whose form is as follows:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And let it all be made of Indian iron and its edges sharp; and let there be small pointed tips on it like files with which needles are made, with which the tooth is filed little by little over several days with ease, so that no other teeth are damaged or hurt.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	Then smooth it at the end, and scrape it with a razor.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if it is a tooth whose one side is broken and hurts the tongue, then you must file that until its harshness is smoothed and flattened, so that the tongue is not hurt nor speech impeded.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	Of restoring damaged teeth with gold or silver foil.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When a concussion and removal occur to teeth due to impact or falling, and the patient is unable to spit it out, and you have treated it with astringent medicines but your treatment has not worked, then so that they do not fall out, they must be strengthened with gold foil rather than silver, for silver turns green and hurts after a few days, but gold never changes.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And the foil should be so thin and thick according to the amount that can fit between the teeth; and the way to make the filling is to take the foil and place twice as much between two healthy teeth, then let it grow with two twists of the foil between two damaged teeth, or if one or more, until the tissue reaches the healthy tooth from the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	Then repeat the filling on the side where you started, and strengthen your work with ease and wisdom so that it is not damaged.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And let your binding be such that it holds the foil so that it does not escape through the roots of the teeth.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And then cut off the excess foil with tweezers or tongs, and place those in every part with gestures, and fold them and conceal them between the healthy tooth and the damaged tooth so that they do not hurt the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And then let it be so tight like Roman armor.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	But if it is loose or torn, strengthen that or those with another foil in the same way at all times.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the form of teeth and the figure of the filling of two healthy and two damaged teeth, thus with their edges tied together:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when one or two teeth are pushed back into their sockets and grow again as we have described, and become damaged again.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And it does not do this except by a skilled and wise artisan.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And sometimes it is apt to use some cause of cow bones, and it is made in the form of a tooth, and placed in the place where the tooth fails, and strengthened as we have said, and remains and serves with that for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter XXXIV.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	Of the incision of the membrane which appears on the tongue and prohibits speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This membrane which appears below the tongue sometimes happens naturally or accidentally due to a wound that has already healed.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation on it is to open the patient's mouth, and let his tongue hang down; then lift up his tongue and insert that nerve membrane according to its breadth so that the tongue is loosened from its binding.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	But if there is any hardness or knotting in it, and this occurs due to the hardening of a wound, then you must pour on an ointment and cut that through its breadth so that you have cut the membrane and the knot is dissolved.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And be careful that there is not a crack in the flesh of the lip and you cut through to the artery and blood flows out.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	Then wash the wound with vinegar or warm water, or water mixed with vinegar; then let the tongue hang down, so that it is not hardened again in any other way.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	But if blood flows out, then apply powdered vitriol to the spot; but if the blood stops, then cauterize the spot with a hot cautery that suits this purpose.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	Then let this be cured by the other causes so that it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	Of the extraction of a ranula below the tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Sometimes an aposteme occurs below the tongue, resembling a small onion that prevents the tongue from its natural movement; and when it is swollen, it fills the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the operation on it is to open the patient's mouth wide in front of you and consider the aposteme.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you see it with a dark or black color, hard, to which the patient does not react, then do not touch it for it is rotten.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it is white and moist, then put on an ointment and insert the needle into it, and cut through all its parts; and if blood flows out when you operate, then let a poultice be applied to it afterwards with powdered vitriol so that the blood is stopped.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then return to your work so that you may have treated it with praise beforehand, and let it be washed with warm vinegar and salt; and cure it with the other cure for this purpose until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter XXXVI.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	Of the extraction of an aposteme of two ears and of that which occurs in the gum, and of other apostemes.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When there is a growth in the throat that resembles a lump, it is made up of glands that are clustered together and protrude outward, and are called tonsils. If you treat them with what we have said in the previous section and they do not heal, then consider whether the abscess is hard, dark-colored, and has little feeling; if so, do not touch it with iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is red in color and the root is thick, then do not touch it with iron due to the flow of blood; instead, let that part mature, and either you should cut it out or it will burst on its own.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is white in color, soft, and the root is slender, then that is what should be cut out.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the operation on him is to consider, before your operation, whether the abscess has already cauterized completely or has diminished in any way; and then have the patient lie down facing the sun, with his head towards you, and open his mouth, and the servant press down on his tongue with a noble instrument of which this is the form:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And it should be made of silver or bronze, and be slender like a needle.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	So when you press with this instrument onto the tongue and the abscess is revealed to you, then grab it with your forceps and pull it outward as far as you can.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Another method is that you pull on one of the membranes, then pierce it with an instrument of which this is the form:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	It is similar to forceps, but the ends of it are bent so that the holes at each end face inwards towards each other, very pointed and sharp; this should be made of iron and well-tempered.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	But if this instrument is not available to you, then pierce it with a spatula of which this is the form of it: And it should be sharp on one side but blunt on the other side.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And after you have pierced one gland, pierce the other according to this method of piercing, and then close up the patient's throat with a cloth soaked in water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if there is a flow of blood, treat it with water that has been cooked with the rind of pomegranate or myrtle leaves and similar things that restrict the flow of blood; then cure it until it heals.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And sometimes there are other abscesses in the throat besides those two tonsils; pierce these according to what I have said about the piercing of two glands equally.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	I once treated a woman for an abscess that had formed in her throat; this abscess was dark in color, had little feeling, and had closed up her throat; the woman was breathing with difficulty, prohibited from eating or drinking water, and had come close to death if she had lived one more day or two.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the abscess had grown so much that it had pushed out two bumps for a distance of two fingers.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	So I cut it open with a pair of forceps and pulled it out; and it came out from him in great quantity; then I pierced the other side where I understood the other tract was, and I bound up his mouth, compressed his tongue, and placed the instrument in that abscess.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And then I cut away a great part of it; only a little blood flowed from him.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	So her throat was completely closed up; she began to drink water at once and then ate food; therefore I did not cease piercing that abscess many times for a long time, and there arose an abscess in the place of that one, which I pierced when it had become prolonged.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	So I bled and cauterized her throat, therefore she began to vomit; and then I walked around in bewilderment and did not know what God had done to me.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter .xxxvii.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	On piercing of the uvula when it is abscessed.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When catarrh descends into the uvula and it is abscessed and long, then it is called perpendicular; and if in the lower part it is thick and round, then it is called a boil.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	But if it is cured with what we have said in the division and does not respond to your treatment, and you see that the abscess cauterized is already thin and is round; and if it is along the length of it and is bloody, dark-colored or black, and has no feeling, then beware of piercing it, for there is danger in that.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you see it according to the way I have said of its whiteness and length, make the patient lie down and press his tongue with an instrument of which we have described the form; then place the forceps in the new one, pull it downward and pierce it with either of the two instruments of which we spoke about piercing two glands.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And beware of piercing it except where it is attached to the natural part by a little addition; for if you pierce it more, you will break its speech.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And after the piercing, use what we have recommended in the piercing of two glands, and cure it until it is healed.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the patient is frightened by the piercing of his throat, beware of using anything on him that causes fear; and the manner of cauterizing him is not with hot water, but you should lay the patient's head in your lap, then press his tongue with the instrument we have said, and then take the water we spoke about in the chapter on cauterization, and apply it with a live coal, and pour that not thick or thin, and with that fill the concavity of the instrument of which we said this is the form:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	Let the end of it be concaved in which the medicine will rest just like the cup of a spoon; then place the instrument with the medicine on the uvula, and let the patient lie on his side so that drool or spit from the mouth of him due to the medicine, so that nothing goes down into his throat and thaws it.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And then hold your hand over the medicine, and express it upon the uvula every half hour until you see it become blackened and subdued by the biting of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you want, take a cotton swab and wrap it around the end of the rod; then dip the rod in the medicine and insert the rod with the cotton into a tube so that the cotton adheres to the tube, and do this as many times until you achieve what you want from cauterizing the uvula; then let it be until it dries up and falls off after three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that the medicine needs to be repeated, repeat it; then after cauterizing cleanse around the uvula with a wet rod that has been dipped in vinegar, and clean what is in the circle of it from the medicine with something that is in the circle of it, and let it be washed with water rubbed, and let it be treated outside with an ointment, and let the gums be treated inside until it is healed.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this kind of treatment is more safe than piercing and bleeding and less dangerous.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Sometimes the uvula is cured by something that is thinner than cauterizing and piercing, for it is cured by sub-smoking in this way: take calamus, hyssop, orris root, rue, Arabic thistles, camomile, bruised and similar to those of the herbs, and mix all these ingredients into one wave, then dip them in wine; let the wave be made with decent wine, and let there be in the middle of the wave a tube, over which is placed an instrument made of iron according to this way; let it be made of silver or of iron.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And the extremity is inserted into the patient's mouth until the steam reaches the uvula above the glottis, until the uvula becomes very foggy.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And then repeat the process several times until it is dry, and beware that you do not perform this treatment at the beginning of the swelling of an ulcer, for it would be too tight on the ulcer, and you should not do this, but rather reveal the ulcer to him cauterize it.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	But if you do not have this instrument available, then take a cane and attach a woolen ball to its end, so that the patient's mouth is comfortable, for the heat of the fire prohibits the steam from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this treatment is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter 38.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	On the extraction of thorns and of that which adheres in the throat, and on other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Many times foreign objects become attached to the glottis or a thorn from the foot or some other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	So you must extract what is visible from among them by pushing the tongue with an instrument in front of it, so that you can see what is in the throat.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And what is hidden in the throat and cannot be seen, you must cause the patient to vomit before the food has digested in the stomach; for often the cause which afflicts the glottis is dislodged by vomiting; or let the patient swallow a piece of napkin or lettuce leaf or a bit of dry bread; or take a piece of dried sponge and rub it with vinegar, and then let the patient swallow it, for when it reaches the place where the thorns are located, they will be dislodged.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	Or take an eel and rub it with vinegar, and have the patient swallow it while it is still moving, or take a pork and when you put it in, move it around to dislodge it.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	But if they are not dislodged by the causes which we have mentioned, then use an instrument of lead in this form:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And it should be larger than a little finger, and at its end there should be a concavity which you insert into the patient's throat with ease.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And hold the patient'’s head up, and beware of touching his throat bone, lest it hurt him or dislodge the thorn with your hand, or that the doctor with his hand.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	But if the patient inserts it himself, because of his knowledge of the location of the cause, and pinches downward, then pull your hand with the instrument upward, as much as he is prepared to bear until it is dislodged.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter 39.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	On the extraction of blood which is attached to the glottis.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When the blood is medicated as we have said in the division of the cure with medicines and do not confer, then consider in the glottis of the patient at the top, for you must press his tongue with an instrument which we have recommended to you.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	So if you see the blood, extract it with a small needle or a thin and sharp one gently.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if you are not able to extract it with that, then take a hollow cane and insert it into the glottis of the patient, and place in the concavity of the cane an iron heated, and do this as many times (until the blood is dead and comes out of the glottis) and abstain from giving water to the patient all day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	And then take a cloth full of water and wring it out in his mouth, and wash the mouth with it; and let no other cause and maw enter there an hour at another time with your hand, for as soon as the blood feels the water, it will come out.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	But if it is not dislodged with what we have recommended, then suffocate the patient with cumin or asafoetida by means of the instrument which we have recommended in the suffocation of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do this, as I will tell you.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And there is another way of operating in the suffocation of it, which is that you take an ash bowl in which are burning coals and the bowl is covered with a cloth, and in the middle of the cloth is a hole, and place the end of the instrument in that hole; then blow upon the fire from below to produce smoke; and let the patient place his mouth on the end of the cane, and close his mouth so that the suffocation does not escape until you know that the suffocation has reached the blood, for the blood will then fall.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if it does not fall, then repeat the suffocation many times, and let the patient abstain from drinking, and eat salty causes and alums, and do not drink water, and thus necessarily the blood must be dislodged by this regimen.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the form of the instrument with which blood is extracted from the glottis when it is seen; and it is like tweezers except that there is no curve in it:
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	which is placed in the glottis, and its end is like a beaver's beak, which is narrow, in which is squeezed with lime, so that when some cause is pressed, it does not slip.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter 40.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which is the sum of the word in regard to ulcers and their sections.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	Ulcers are many kinds of diseases, of various types, according to their memory, each one in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they differ in their penetration and sections by two ways, of which the one is by the kind of ulcers in themselves; and by that which comes from humidity.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second way is according to the places in which they occur in the body, for an ulcer that accidentally occurs on the head is different from that which occurs on the buttocks; and an ulcer in a fleshy place is different from that which occurs at a joint; and each one of them is cured by operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And there are also some ulcers which are not punctured but rather a maturation of the pus in them or completion.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	And other ulcers which are incised when they are cruciate and not matured according to their completion, or which are near the joints, for an ulcer when it is near a joint, its matter is prolonged within that circuit, and the ligaments or nerves of that joint are greatly corrupted by it, so there is contraction of that member; or it is near a principal member, and if you delay its penetration until it is matured, the member becomes sore; or it is near the buttocks, then penetrate it that it may not fester; or when it is made in the terminal part, it should not be punctured when there is no completion, but it must be near the buttocks so that its matter does not spread to the parts of the buttocks, and a fistula is made, or that it is made in the terminal part which is not healed.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	But when you know the time of the penetration of the ulcer and also when it is matured.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And know that it is matured when the pain subsides and the fever ceases, and also when there is a decrease in heat and pulse, and the sharpness of the head of the ulcer, and other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And because you should know when there is penetration in that pus at the bottom of the ulcer and pus comes from the cure of the eminence.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And penetration must be made along the length of the flesh or the body, if the ulcers are in the parts of the hands or feet and on the joints, on the cords of the nerves, on the tendons; and, finally, in all places where there is no reflection; for in those where it is reflected, use penetration according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	But when the pustule is in a fleshy part, then it is better to make the incision in such a way that digestion is confirmed according to the proper course; because if you pierce it in front of this, the body of the pus of it and of the matter is prolonged, and much of the lips of it are hardened and the depth of it.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	But some pustules are pierced according to the width of the flesh or body, or according to that from which the member needs.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And when you administer a small incision, in large pustules make a large and wide incision, or many dry incisions according to the variety of the size of the pustules.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And others are of the pustules in which the cord is hollow and cut, when it is made so that the bread and the wound is in a term that is already, as well as that which happens in trops of dubelec and of buboes.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And of those that are cut with a three-sided section; and of those in which it is cut as the shape of a leaf of myrtle, as well as the pustules of the armpits.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And of them are those in which a round section and a moon-like section are administered, and similar to them.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	But that which is not head as their pustules are superficial, you pierce that with a superficial incision, or flat only.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And when the pustule is large and has collected much healthy matter, you pierce that and do not hesitate to extract all the pus at that time; having extracted a part of it, then close the pustule again on the next day, and then extract a larger part, and do this repeatedly according to the degree that it is discharged.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	And especially if the patient is of cold temperament, or a woman in labor, or a small child, or an old person in decline, because the animal spirit is often resolved by the discharge of matter, and quickly dies, and you operate on them.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Therefore keep this chapter with great caution, and when you pierce those pustules, cleanse the wounds and consider that if the wound of the pustule is small, or it is a flat section, then you administer the one or the other in the usual way; and if the pustule is large, and the fissures of the incision are many, then place wool in each crack so that they come together.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if in the pustule a part of the cord is cut or you have hollowed it out around the circuit, then fill it with old wool or thread made from linen cloth, as when you treat wounds or roots, without moisture; and close that on the third day; and then process that and cure it with what you would usually do for wounds so that it heals.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	But if bleeding occurs in the hour of your operation, then you administer water rubbed with vinegar and wine mixed in which you soak a linen cloth, and place that over the site of the bleeding several times.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	But if the bleeding persists, then you administer medicine and treatment, and powders which I have recommended in other places of this book and of division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	But if it is in the winter season, and the site of the pustule is a place of many nerves, then you soak powders in wine and hot oil, and place those on the sites.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is in the summer, and the sites are fleshy, then you place powders soaked in water and oil or wine and oil, and do this every third day, as we have said; and then open the pustule and cleanse it and administer in its treatment whatever is appropriate for it so that it heals.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And this is what is necessary to know about the cure of pustules universally, but according to the way of distinction I have already said of each pustule in which manner is the way of its cure by particular chapters.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter 41.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	Of the section of pustules which come in the cord of the head.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the cord of the head there are small pustules, and they are of the species of nodes which contain membranes that are made to them; and the species of them are many.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And of them are pimples, and of those there are which contain moisture similar to lime.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And of those there are which contain moisture similar to dust, and resembling them; and of those there are which are scaly, hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the section of all of them, and in the extraction of those there is no fear, as when you extract those it does not contradict the artery.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation in the section of those is that you express those with an instrument the form of which see below, knowing that it contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	Because if what is contained is moisture, then you split that with an incision according to length by superficial incision according to this form:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And you begin the incision from line B to line G. So when the moisture is discharged, then you scrape that by which it contains that moisture, and you do not let any cause of all remain there, because repeated incisions return if anything remains there.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And then you soak the wound in Egyptian ointment, if available, and if not, in water and salt; and fill that with it and leave it overnight, because by that you erode all of what remains of that film.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And then you repeat on that wound with Egyptian ointment again and again if necessary, until you are confident that there remains no cause of that film; then cure the wound with ointment so that it heals.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if pustule contains a fatty node, then you split that according to this form:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	with an incision having the shape of a cross, and cut between two lips of the incision and scrape that completely apart from every part, and use your strength in extracting the membrane which contains that.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	But if the artery opposes you, then do what I have told you primarily.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And similarly do in the pustule that is scaly and in its cure as we have said; and an incision on scaly pustule is pus, because it is of little blood and little moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And sometimes some of these pustules are in the head in some people who do not have moisture; and the cause is that they strike upon a pustule on the head of an old woman and stop up the pustule as if with a stone, harsh, white, which could not be pierced, and if anyone hit it, it bled.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	But in other accidental pustules on the head is not this chapter, but like the pustules that come to children's heads and cause the roots of their ears, but the section of these are superficial incisions.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And make the incision of those from the lowest part of them so that the body of the matter is driven out to the lowest parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	And then cure those with whatever is appropriate for its cure.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 42.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	Of the section of scrofulas which occur in the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	Many times these pustules occur in the neck and armpits and armpits and other parts of the body; and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those which occur in the neck, and some are engendered between them, and every scrofula of these is within its own membrane, and so as in the nodes and pustules of the head, as we have recommended.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	And the types of these scrofula are varied, some are stony in nature, others contain moisture, and others are malignant and resistant to treatment.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Therefore, when you see one in good condition for cutting, whose appearance is similar to the color of copper, and is smooth all around, and not attached to the nerve of the neck, or to the veins or arteries, and is not deep, you should incise it superficially from above downward along the line from G to B. Then excise it completely all around, and stretch it open with forceps, or with hooked instruments if necessary, as we have said before about abscesses on the head. Extract it little by little.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is important to be cautious not to cut into a vein or nerve.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And use a spatulum that is not too sharp, so as not to hurt your hand when you make the incision, or to disturb the patient; and cut only what is necessary to be cut, for if you cut into a vein or artery and are forced to stop the operation, then apply the plaster of quicklime, or other powders which stop the flow of blood, and close up the wound. Then let that which causes the pain of the abscess remain inside, and when the severity of the abscess is lessened and it starts to suppurate,
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the blood is clotted.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Therefore, return to your operation until you have finished it.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And then ask with your finger if there is any cause for the other small scrofula; therefore cut into them and clean them out.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if there is a large vein at the root of the scrofula, then you must not cut into that scrofula from its root.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	But before, fold a piece of cloth firmly and place it over the scrofula so that it falls down by itself without doing any harm.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	Then fill the wound with old cotton which you have already soaked in Egyptian ointment, and treat it.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you excise the scrofula completely, then you must bring together the two lips of the wound and stitch them immediately so that no superfluity remains.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	But if you see that there is superfluity because of the size of the scrofula, then you must understand how to cut into its root, and excise it and administer a stitch and that which is said.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for those scrofula that contain moisture, pierce it with a superficial incision where you see the location of its maturation, and open an incision so that the pus drains out from deep in the body, as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And then administer an incision, apply calcium with ointment and similar to those, so that it corrodes what is caused by the corruption.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And when you see the wound already cleansed, then treat it with generative ointment until it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter .XLI.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	Of the section of the pilon of the wound of an accident in the jaw.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	The ancients describe this section in the pilon, and I have not seen any man in our land who has done that.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of their speech.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	But in men who have squintness, the extraction of the pilon should be avoided, so that there is no benefit by which all the veins and the greater nerves of the patient are here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	But for those who have cold abscesses in the mouth or jaw or both ears, when the disease is not in the skull, they must use the section of the pilon to avoid destruction which is caused by piercing.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore, when we want this, we cut the pilon beneath three circles of the circles of the pilon, or four with small incisions in terms of width at that which is between two circles due to quantity; and the incision should be in the brain, not in the cartilage, and this location is convenient for incision because it is deprived of flesh and its blood vessels are thin.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor is fearful, then he should stretch the jaw with forceps and cut through the soft palate so that it reaches the pharynx; but avoid the blood vessels if you see any cause for them.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And then cut the palate according to what we have recommended; and it is signified by the incision of the pharynx by the flame which is from that which has exited by that which is broken and by the piercing of the voice.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And let the wound remain open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Therefore, when the hour is reduced in which piercing is feared, bring together the two lips of the soft palate of the wound and sew that only to the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And then administer medicines that cause flesh to grow so that it is healed.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And Albucasis said that the sum of his speech which we have recommended, exposition is not but that vessels which some of these abscesses have oppressed the jaw of the patient and the patient has died, and his throat was choked, and some go to cut the epiglottis so that the patient breathes through the wound in the soft palate because of any respiration, and he is saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And therefore he commanded to leave the wound open until the malevolence of the disease is consumed; and its malevolence lasts for three days; and then he commands the wound to be closed and treated so that it is healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And what I have seen from my masters is that a servant pressed a pillow and made an incision in her jaw and pierced one part of the trachea of the lung, and she was called to its treatment, and found the blood which had exited from the wound dripping.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Therefore he confessed that she had not cut a vein or artery, and the wind exited from the wound, and he treated it so that fire was healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And he did not listen to the servant unless she spoke in the voice, and then after some days she returned to the treatment of her dispositions.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	Now he says that in the section of the pilon there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter .XLV.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	Of section on an abscess which occurs in the jaw from outside, and it is called a hernia of the jaw.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This hernia of the jaw is a great abscess according to the color of the body, and it occurs in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it occurs in two ways; for it is either natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And the natural one is not easy to cure.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental occurs in two ways; one is similar to grassy knots, and the other way is similar to an abscess which is caused by a knotted artery, and that one is feared.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And do not make a presumption about it unless with a hot iron unless in the spot from which it exits.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you probe it and examine it with the finger, and if you open it like a grassy knot and it is not suspended by any of the veins, then cut it as the knots, and excise that from where the skin and bursiclam; and unless, scrape all its substance, and then treat the location with what that which covers it of the cure so that it is healed.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter .XLV.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	Of section of the kinds of knots.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	Of knots, there are many kinds of spices and I have already said all of them in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And you note that I count the difference between a knot and an exitus with doubt.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Thus I say that the exit is a hotness and fever and violent pains within which is sedated the boiling of the superfluity; and it is completed putrefaction which then ceases the fever, pain, and heat.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	But if there is no heat nor fever nor pain, then it is proper for the lion to eat from his own sack.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And it is according to the color of the body, and its beginning is like a head and it is made thus with a vacuum, whether larger or smaller, and they are according to two species, either they are fat and contain moisture, and the colors of the moisture are mottled, according to what I said in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Therefore, when you come to the cure of node, that you probe and inquire into it at the beginning with an instrument which is called a probe, according to what will come to its form in the chapter which is near this.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And it is the manner of inquiry of pustules and of all nodes, and it is that you take this instrument and insert it into the most moist place which you find in the pustule, and you move your fingers with it little by little while you know that the instrument has penetrated the membrane.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	Then finish your hand according to the measure of the size of the pustule, and then withdraw the probe and consider what has been expelled in its trail.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the moisture is running out, of whatever color it may be, then you shall incise it superficially according to what I have said in the other pustules.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if from the trail of the probe you do not get moisture, then know that it is fat.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And dry over it with an incision having the form of a cross according to this form:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	Thus as you have been taught, and suspend it with pins, and excise the membrane from all parts with ease, and preserve the skin or sack if you can over that, and extract that pus from the node.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	But if it is broken during the operation, then it is not possible to extract that pus, and many times there remains some of it in there, and then you shall withdraw that little by little so that no part of it remains behind.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	For if any of it remains behind, a little or a lot, the node will return according to the greater part.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that any small part remains behind, then complete the wound with some acute corrosive powders and strengthen it, and place over it which is where the pustule was cauterized, and cure that according to another cure until it is healed.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if it is a great node, then you shall stitch the two lips of it together and cure that with what incarnates.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	But if a pulsatil vein comes to it contrarily, or not-pulsatil, then you shall cut and fill the place of gash which is vetriol, and let that rest for two days or three until the boil of blood ceases, and then return to incising what was broken of the node.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter .XLVI.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	Of the forms of the instruments necessary in incision and piercing.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Those are the forms of the probes, and they are of three species, and some are great, and some are smaller, and some are little.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of the great probe is this:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of the lesser probe is this:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of the little probe is this:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	Let them be made of iron, of fullude, of ends which are pointed decently, so that the instrument pierces through the pustules.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are the forms of the experients, and they are named albered, and one of those is called berid.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And they are of three species, for some are great, lesser and little.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of the great experiment, its form is:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of the lesser experiment, its form is:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of the little experiment, its form is:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	It is fitting that they be for pustules and exituses and fistulas and tumors for it is among those that are of the bones and of other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And they are made round, large, and sharp, with which the membranes are sewn together, and they are made of lemon copper, or of iron, or of silver, and the best are when they are made of lemon copper.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And they are made the experients of black lead, which are accounted to open up the fistulas in the cavity of which their reflections are reflected by their elevation with those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And they are of three species, for some are long, and some are lesser, and some are short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and of its narrowness.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	The form of the great experiment of lead is:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	The form of the lesser experiment of lead is:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	The form of the little experiment of lead is:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of the pins are of many species, for some are simple, which have only one curvature, and they are of three species: great, little, and lesser.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And their bodies are hooked, and they are of three species.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And some of them have two curvatures, and they are of three species.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And some of them have three curvatures, and they are of three species.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all those are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	The form of the simple great hook is:
Forma de unci simple migier:	The form of the simple lesser hook is:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	The form of the simple little hook is:
Forma de unci orp gran:	The form of the body great hook is:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	The form of the body lesser hook is:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	The form of the body little hook is:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	The form of the great hook having two curvatures is:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	The form of the lesser hook having two curvatures is:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	The form of the little hook having two curvatures is:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	The form of the great hook having three curvatures is:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	The form of the lesser hook having three curvatures is:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	The form of the little hook having three curvatures is:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the forms of the scalpels with which they are dried and cut into the nodes and pustules, and they are of three species, for some is great, lesser, and little.
Forma de scapel gran:	The form of the great scalpel is:
Forma del scapel migier:	The form of the lesser scalpel is:
Forma de scapel pauc:	The form of the little scalpel is:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The extremities of those with which the incision is made are sharp and the other extremities are not-sharp, and they are not stopped in such a manner, but is done gently upon the incision of vein or nerve, and by that the patient is healed and finds tranquility through the cooling which cools the excoriation of the pustule.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the forms of poultices, and they are of three species: great, lesser, and little, thus with wool.
La forma de magda gran:	The form of the great poultice is:
Forma de magda migier:	The form of the lesser poultice is:
Forma de magda pauc:	The form of the little poultice is:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	Let them be made of wool and they shall be similar to felt with which is made alcohol.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And it is in the extremity pointed with spathon and in that they pierce the teeth and gums, when you wish, thus as well.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of spathons which are made to be placed between the teeth and ought not to pierce pustules, and they do not hurt the patients, and they are of three species: great, lesser, and little.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the forms of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of wounds through which blood flow is cut off are of three kinds: great, moderate and small.
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	They are made of citron wood, round with some length and they are slender.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And whoever makes these kinds of cupping glasses, they must be big, moderate and small, in order that through them blood flow is cut off quickly when necessary, and at other times if medicine is not available.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	Yet you must not use these to cut off blood flow in all parts of the body, but only in fleshy areas, like on the insides of the ankles and thighs, and on the inside of the upper arms, nipples, abdomen and armpits, and similar fleshy hollows.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And sometimes these instruments are made small, resembling slices of grapes, according to this form; through which blood is cut off when a flebotomy is done, or an incision in a vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes they are made round according to this form:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	About the care of men's breasts which are like women's.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Sometimes men's breasts become enlarged due to sleepiness and they start to feel soft, and their breasts become swollen and resemble women's breasts, and they become proud.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you observe this, when you cut into them use a lunar incision according to this form, from the line of B to the line of G, and remove all the swelling completely, and fill the wound with a medicated ointment, and sew together the two lips of the wound and cure it until it is healed.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the breast sags towards the sides and becomes soft due to its size like a woman's, then it should be cut into two parts along its length with two incisions resembling lunar figures, each containing the other according to the end of one line containing the other, so that the major line contains the minor line according to this form from B to G. And remove the cord which is between the two lips of the wound and the fat, and administer what we have said about the suturing and powders that are necessary in the cure until it is healed.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not complete the incision of this which one must be cut into due to restlessness and blood flow, then fill the wound with a cotton bandage dipped in corrosive ointment and leave it so that it corrode what is rotten from the swelling and cure it until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	About puncturing abscesses which come under the nipples.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	These abscesses which come under the nipples are of the species of scrofula, hard, and they contain a sac full of fluid.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And some of them contain humidity; and those which contain humidity should be cut into with a lunar incision according to this figure: from the line of G to the line of B. And when all that is in the abscess has been discharged, then fill it on the next day with a poultice made of old cheese.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And the wound should be washed and cured with an appropriate ointment until it is healed.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the abscess of the species of lumps and scrofula is, then you should split it as we have said in the section on scrofula with a fork.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	But if the wound extends so that it causes purulent discharge, then administer cauterization on it as we have said before.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	About incisions of abscesses that occur through an artery or vein.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an artery is ruptured and the cord which is on it is consolidated, then many times there occurs an abscess: and through what ways inflammation and abscess occur through an artery or vein: for when an abscess occurs through an artery, it extends far into the depths of the body; and when you poke the abscess with your fingers, you feel a stridor in it.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And what occurs through a vein is round to the surface of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And an incision on this abscess is dangerous, and especially in those that are under the armpits, in the groin, in the neck, and in many parts of the body; and it is very serious, therefore its cure with a cautery should be avoided, and what occurs at the extremities or on the head should be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	But over what occurs through them due to inflammation of the hole of the artery, split it in the cord with a long incision; and open the incision with forceps and release the artery and remove it from the tunics until it is uncovered.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And put an awl over it and make it penetrate into the other side, and tighten the artery with a double thread in two places, — which causes you to pull it out by its ends through two arteries which are in the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And punch the place which is between two ligaments with a spatula so that all the blood in it flows out and the abscess is dissolved.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And administer cure to where pus is generated within so that the ligaments fall, and cure it with appropriate ointments until it is healed.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if it is an abscess due to an incision of a vein, then you must hold with your hand what is possible for the abscess on the cord, and insert the awl under the place which you held with your hand, and make it penetrate; and tie the apostema with a double thread so that you pull it out from the other side, and ligate the apostema with a strong thread according to what we have said about the ligament of two parts with two extremities of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	But if you are afraid to pull out the thread, then insert the needle under all the apostema according to the incision of the needle first, and tighten your threads in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Then dry the abscess in its middle part where it has risen so that when it is dried you cut off the superfluity of the cord and remove what is bound to it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And put powder over it which you have dipped in wine and oil, and administer the cure that is made with poultices and ointments until it is healed.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Chapter 50 about the abscess which occurs due to torsion of nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Just as abscesses occur in arteries and veins, and similarly abscesses occur in nerves when they occur due to excessive work or occur due to similar reasons.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And it occurs mostly in the places of the limbs or the neck, or any place where the joints are bent.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And it is a serious abscess, and it resembles the color of the rest of the body, and in its major parts are dispositions of pain and when it is pressed with force, the patient feels a kind of stupor.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And it is not an abscess which extends into the depths of the body, and therefore it is under the cord and it is bent in every direction and does not go forwards or backwards.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore those which are at the joints should not be cauterized with a hot iron, because they cause great contraction when heated.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	But what occurs in the head or forehead, split the cord with a spatula.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	But if it is small, then cut off that pus with forceps and open it at its roots.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If it is large, then suspend it with a hook, and scrape it, and stop the bleeding; and stitch the wound, and let it heal from within.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 51:
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	Chapter 51: Of a section of an ulcer which happens in the jaw that happens in the belly.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	Some men are found to have bumps on their bellies and other parts of their bodies, which are called warts due to their similarity to mushrooms. The root of these warts is subtle, but the top is thick; sometimes their lips are affected, and they can be small or grow very large.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	I have seen one such person, and in his belly were two growths resembling mushrooms, and there was no difference between them - they were both white and had a fine root.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And the lips of these warts were inverted and split, and moisture flowed from them all the time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Therefore, I cut those, and found inside one of them, in a foot, 15 inches deep. And the other, six inches.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And the operation on their incision is that you should consider if the patient is humid and the color of the growth is white and humid with a subtle root; then you should cut it open with a wide spatula, and let it burn in the fire until it cauterizes - for often the section of it expels a lot of blood. And if it bleeds, cauterize it.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if you see the patient is fearful and anxious, be careful not to cut with iron; instead, take a new lead seal, and tightly press it against the growth, in the manner we have described. Then leave it for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	Then, tighten the lead wire firmly around it; thus, you should keep tightening the lead wire until it is very firm, until it falls off by itself.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	But if the growth has a thick root, then in its incision there is a cause for fear and terror, especially when it is in the belly.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	But it is possible that you cut only half of it, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	Then, treat it so that the wound heals.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And be careful not to cut a growth that is of dusky color, with little feeling, and which has a soft texture, for that is an abscess.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And I remembered the case of a man who came to me.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 52:
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	Chapter 52: On the cure of a hernia at the navel.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	A hernia at the navel is caused by many things: or by fissures in the diaphragm which is above the belly, and its membranes or intestines depending on where they are; or from blood flowing out of a vein or artery as mentioned earlier; or from a constricted bowel in it.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	But if it is because of a fissure in the diaphragm and an elevation of its membrane, then the color of the hernia is similar to the color of the body; and there is little pain, and it appears in different places.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it is due to the hernia of an intestine, then its situation is as we have described, with more intense diversity, and when you press it with your fingers, it hides, and then returns; and it becomes strong in itself, and grows a lot because of the entrance of food and violent work.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	But if it is because of moisture, then it is soft and does not hide when you press it with your hand, nor is it bound together, nor is it dry.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it is because of blood, then with these signs the hernia declines to blackness.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	But if it is because of dry flesh, then it is a heavy hernia, large and hard, and it is formed according to a quantity.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	But if it is because of a bowel, then its touch is soft.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation on it is that you should consider if the hernia at the navel is because of blood from an artery or a vein, or due to a bowel; then know that you must be prohibited from curing it, for in that there is fear and terror as we taught you in the chapter where we spoke about hernias from an artery and a vein.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the hernia at the navel is because of an intestine or its membrane, then command the patient to hold his breath and stand straight; then press with your finger around the whole navel, and command him to stand opposite you with his chest against your chest, and surround it with a wide spatula around the place which you pressed with your finger; then extend the hernia to the sides above it with a large hook, and tie it in the circuit with strong thread or with lead wire in the decent way.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	Then cut open the middle of the abscess that extends over the ligament and insert the said needle into that area, and if you have not tied it or guarded it by the ligament, then you extract the intestines and push them back into the parts within the abdomen.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have tied the cloth, then take it by its end; and cut off its excess.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	But if it is opposite your artery or vein, then surround that spot and return to your operation; and take two needles and place in those two strong threads and insert two needles into the circuit which you have made around the abscess in the form of a cross, making them penetrate; and then tighten the abscess into four parts over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you wish, remove the needles and leave the spot open so that the stretched flesh can fall back down by itself; or cut off what is thinned out and let it heal, and then cure that with something that covers the wounds so that it heals.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the protuberance of the navel is a little flesh in there or because of moisture, then you should hollow out the abscess as we have said and draw out the blood or moisture which you find in there, and then cure that with something that covers it and consolidates the area.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 53:
De curacio de cranc.	Of the curing of a hernia.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have already said, in the division, about the kind of hernia and in what way its cure is with medicines, and that it is cut off in there by iron so that it is not ulcerated; and we have said that a hernia is engendered in the mother and the precaution for its cure.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And the ancients said that sometimes a hernia is in a place where its removal is possible, just as of a hernia which is in the breasts or in the thigh and similarly located in other parts of the body to extract all of that, and especially when it is starting out small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	But when it is ancient and large, do not approach it, for I have never seen one of those heal nor have I heard of one coming to that.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation on it when it is located as we have said, is that you precede and leave the patient and purge them of black bile sometimes, and then you open that up if a clear swelling is found.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	Then prepare the patient with a preparation in which it is located by operation, and then pierce into the wound with nails which cover that; and then hollow out from all parts with a good cutting saw to make sure that no cause of its roots remains.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And let the blood flow out, and do not close that up quickly, and squeeze out the places and wipe off the thick blood with your hand or with an instrument by which it is possible for you of the instruments.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if it causes an obstruction of thick blood from a vein or artery, then cauterize that spot so that the flow of blood is stopped, and then cure that with the other cure so that it heals.
Capitol .liv.	Chapter 54:
De curacio de ydropici.	Of the cure for hydropsy.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already recommended, in the division, about the kinds of hydropsy from water, and the signs of each kind, about its cure with medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And that which is cured by iron is nothing but the kind of althitas alone, and it is not approached by iron with the kind of tympany or with the kind of hyposarca, for that is deadly.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have treated this kind of hydropsy tympany with medicines and it does not bring about your medicine, then consider, for if the patient has already achieved debility, or is with another illness, another hydropsy, just as if it is in them coughing or with a chest and similarly to those, then beware that you do not treat them with iron, for fear is over that.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	But if you see the patient bloated with strength, and in them there is no other illness but hydropsy alone, and they are not an infant or old, then the way of the operation on it is that you raise the patient between your hands, and then you press their belly with your hand, filling up the water to the area below the navel, and then take a sharp spatula according to this form:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	Let it be of two sharp parts long, with a pointed extremity like a spatula; but let there be in it some short brevity little by little, so that in the operation with that you do not pass into the intestine, and let you lead that.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And then consider if the generation of hydropsy is from parts of the intestines, for then beware that you lengthen from the navel by the quantity of three fingers to the areas below, in the right side of it over the navel.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	But if the generation of hydropsy is from illness of the liver, then your section should be left of the navel by three fingers.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if its generation is from the spleen, then your section should be in the right.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And beware that your section is over the side on which the patient wants to lie so that the excess does not run to that spot.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And then pierce with the instrument all the way through, and insert into that section, and lift your hand with the spatula between the navel and the stomach, and you draw out that; and if it is the quantity of a fingernail or a little more.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And then pierce the navel so that the spatula reaches to the desired place, and it is a location of water.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then extract that and insert an instrument of which this is the form:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	and it is like a tube of subtle silver; it is made of silver or brass or lion’s leather, and at the bottom end of it there is a small hole, and in its sides are two holes: one from one side and one from the other side; and its extremity is split according to the manner of a feather, just like this:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And at the top end of it is a ring, for when the instrument reaches to the water, then that immediately draws up over the instrument, and then evacuates the water in the momentary quantity, for if you evacuate from that more than does not cover in the moment, it causes the patient to die by resolution of their animal spirit, or happens to them five-fold which is near death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	But evacuate from that according to the quantity of the strength of it and according to what mean to you the dispositions of the patient’s pulse and of its goodness.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And then extracted the instrument and tied up the water which causes is that as soon as it is drawn up by the navel, and recommended to you that you pierce that according to that manner.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And then return the instrument on the next day if they can tolerate that, and extract a little water, and do that for several days with fear, and beware of mistake so that it does not run out of water except for a little.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	But if you fear for the patient and let out of the water a great quantity, then cure that with burial in dry sand, and move it to a bath, and to the sun until long time; and cure that with medicines drying so that it heals.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And cauterize over the stomach, and the liver and the spleen and also the extraction of water, according to what I have recounted in that which is preceded.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter 55:
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	Of the cure for children who are born with places of urine not perforated.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Some children are born from the womb of their mother, and the head of the umbilical cord is not pierced (or it is pulled out or is not in its proper place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	So when the umbilical cord is cut, pierce it immediately with a sharp knife according to this form.
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	Then put in the wound a small lead nail and tie it, and keep it for three days or four.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when he wants to urinate, he is squeezed and urinates; and then return it.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not put the lead, it is possible that the urine which goes on the spot, will not harm this clot.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	But he of whom the umbilical cord is pulled out tightly, let him be treated with a lead nail as we have said for several days until it is enlarged.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	But those in whom the umbilical cord is not in its place, they are sick, and this is why: because he who is born and the umbilical cord is drawn out from the end of the penis because he cannot urinate from the parts inside, while he lifts up his penis with his hand to the parts above; and it is not generation because the sperm cannot reach the mother according to rectitude, and it is a great illness.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	And the manner of the operation in him is that the patient be laid on his back, and you extend the head of his penis with your left hand by a violent traction, and insert the end of the umbilical cord into the foreskin with a sharp knife, just as it is incised with a feather, or you scratch some part so that the membrane of him comes like the head of the penis, and that the umbilical cord falls in its proper place according to what each person has.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And beware in your operation of bloodletting, because many times this happens there; and apply to him something that stops the blood, and heal the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter .lvi.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	Of albitter which happens in the foreskin on the head of the penis, and of corruption and blackness and adhesion of the foreskin of the head of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Many times this albitter happens in the penis and is an eminence of flesh that is sick.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And one is malignant and the other is not malignant.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	Non-malignant, let him be hung up with a subtle thread and cut it off so that the whole thing comes out; and then apply to that cut submerging in Egyptian ointment; and then heal it with fine ointment until it is healed.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the albitter is malignant, of a bad color, then let him receive cautery at its incision and its root.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	But if the albitter is in the foreskin of the head of the penis and not circumcised, and one part of the albitter is inside the foreskin and the other part is outside, then let him cut off the albitter that is inside at the beginning so that it is consolidated; and then heal that hole, because when you heal that foreskin, it is not certain that it will not be torn.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And it has been seen that this happens in the genitals and in the foreskin blackness and corruption, therefore let him cut away everything that is already blackened and wants to become corrupted or what is already corrupted; and then apply on that a line with honey, which is pounded with bran of pomegranate and crushed and sifted.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And then heal it with the other cure until it is healed.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	But if there is bloodletting, then administer lunar cautery according to this form:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	because the cautery of juice is for two dispositions together, that is for bloodletting and for the wound when it is corrupted.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the penis is corroded and is destroyed all at once, then let him insert into the meat of the foreskin a lead cannula so that the patient urinates through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adhesion of the foreskin with the head of the penis (and this adhesion does not happen except in him of whom the foreskin is not circumcised; and when adhesion happens by wound or by blister) let him scrape with a blunt knife so that the ligament is dissolved and the head of the penis is liberated from all parts.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to pull off those closely, then let him scrape with a sharp knife the cause of the head of the penis and the foreskin; and this is why the foreskin, when it is thin, easily pierces through its thinness quickly.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And then separate between the foreskin and the head of the penis with a subtle thread, which is already moistened in the water wiped so that they do not adhere another wound.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And then let it be healed with white vitriol until it is consolidated.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter .lvii.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	Of the cleansing of children and of the cure of that which happens to those who are circumcised.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a cure of continence like the other wounds: but rather since it comes from our operation and from our will, and its root is properly in children, it is necessary that we assign to it better operation and way more the longer route is lost to health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore I say that the ancients did not prescribe circumcision in any of their books, because they do not use it in their laws, and it is not except that we have acquired by experience, which cause is that I have observed the greater part of the artisans and barbers using circumcision and cleansing with a knife and torches; and they use ligament with wax and incision with the nail.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And I have already prohibited all these manners and not found better cleansing with tweezers, with ligament with wax that in cleansing with the nail, because many times the cord of the foreskin on two tunics, and the loose tunic is pulled from above, and it is very easily forced to another incision and pain is secured.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And in the cleansing which is done by the apothecaries, and it is with the finger, of which the surgeons use, the incision of the extremity of the virile member is not secured, because it very easily goes into the groove of it.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	But in the operation with the nail, it very often damages iron and corrupts your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the child’s cord is short by nature, and many times it happens in such a way that it does not need cleansing, and I have seen this.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	But of the cleansing which is done with tweezers and ligament with wax, its goodness, I have discovered through experience, because the tweezers are of proportional incision, therefore that the acuteness which is above is also like the acuteness which is below; and then when you put your hand so that they are proportioned two acutenesses, and insert according to a comparison in one time; and compression of the wax is made with a figure containing the cord of the penis all around, with which no error of all can be caught.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the manner of the first operation is that you make the child be very still if it is one of those who understand a little, and you do not do but that you tie the wax on the penis only so much, and that you leave it within another day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And then let him cheer up in all that way which is possible for you to receive his intelligence.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And then have the patient lie between your knees, and let him be carefully positioned, not falling asleep; and hide the forceps in your hand or under your foot, so that the child does not see them nor any of the other instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And then put your hand into the vagina and blow into the cervix, and draw it in so that the head of the cervix comes out, and then cleanse it of what is accumulated there from filth.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And then tie the place that is marked with a thread of wool, and then put a little lower from that a second thread, and hold it with your finger and press the place of the ligature underneath so that it holds well, and cut between two threads.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then lift the cervix upwards and pull out the head of the cervix; and let the blood flow little by little, for that is better; and put powder on it and on the powder put a cloth in which is spread mallow gum mixed with recently roasted oil; and leave that on there for another day; and heal that with ointment until it is healed.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The shape of the forceps for cleansing, this is their shape:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	The ends should be blunt and the other sharp, so that the ram of the claw does not come out, and the length of both points should be equal to the length of two handles joined together.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	But the mistake in cleansing is that sometimes the cervix goes in completely, or it breaks away from the incision.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore, you should push it out with your finger before the apostemation of that place and insert it according to equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it with your finger, then pull it out with a needle and insert the needle.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	But if three days have passed and the apostemation under the cervix has not gone down, then you should put something into it so that the apostemation is cauterized, and cut that with ease, and insert it according to how it was prepared for you.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And beware of the head of the cervix, because it will not bear that.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And therefore heal that with what the plague is consolidated by powders of which we have spoken in the treatise on powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it has been cut too much and obeys what is above, that does not matter to him.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	But heal that with what we have said so that it may be healed.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter .lviii.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	Of the healing of urine retained in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction caused by a stone or congealed blood, or by inflammation or ulceration, and resembles those we have spoken of in the division of urinary diseases.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not dissolved and retention of it is caused by a stone which is already in the neck of the bladder, then have the patient bend over his knees.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	Then have the feet of the patient supported on something below his back and the patient's belly extended from the part above his back, and the patient should press on his chest as much as is possible for him.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Then the neck of the bladder being compressed there is expulsion of the stone to the parts behind, so that the urine is voided.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if it is not dissolved with what we have said and the cause is made vehement on the patient, then administer extraction of him with an instrument which is called a syringe, of which this is the shape: It should be of silver and be made hollow like a reed pen with a quill of goose feather made hollow in likeness to a long reed about a palm and a half in length, to which there should be a tube made hollow at its end.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the manner of the ejection of urine through it is that you take the thread doubled and wet in the end of it with wool or cotton with good wetting; and insert the ends of the thread into the end of the syringe, and with forceps if any superfluous cause from the wool, but insert it into the tube with vehemence. And then fill the syringe with water and oil.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And let the patient lie on his back, and insert the bladder and cervix of him with oiled water, olive oil, and oils.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	Then insert the syringe with ease so that it reaches the root of the cervix; then double the cervix above at the part of the foreskin; and press the syringe into it; and press it in until it reaches the bladder, and let the patient be bent so that the cause is empty, and do not make an incision according to this order, but go through tortuosity.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And then extend the thread with wool little by little, for the urine will suck the wool.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Then extract it and cause urine by healing, and use the syringe, do not cease doing this until the bladder is evacuated and the patient is relieved.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter .lix.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	Of the quality of clysterization of the bladder with camphor and with similar instruments which are appropriate for that.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When there happens in the bladder ulceration or apostemation, or congealed blood in it, or constriction of the ureter, and you want to distill water and medicines into it, then have the instrument called a camphor bag made, and this is its shape:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	But in the end of it there should be a hole, so that it is closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in it have three holes: two on one side, thus alternately.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	At the beginning there is a hollow place in which is put what is to be inserted, and it should have an amount that pushes that, its addition, so that when any cause is pulled from the humidities, it is pulled, and when it is expelled, with that it is pushed, and when it is expelled far, according to how the clampcedra is used with which naphtha is smeared on the sea-shells.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	Therefore, when you want to inject moisture into the bladder, insert the end of clampcedra into the moisture, and pull with that what is pushed on the parts above, for the moisture is pulled in the hollow of the clampcedra.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	Then insert the end of the clampcedra into the cervix as we have prescribed in the syringe; and press the moisture with what you press it, for that moisture will pervade the bladder immediately, and the patient will feel that at once.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The shape of the subtle clyster by which the bladder is clysterized, and it is this shape:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And it should be made of silver or lead, whose head, moreover, should be similar to a small feather, and under it there is a tube within the hollow.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	Then take the bladder of a goat and put in it the moisture which you want to clysterize in the bladder, then tie that between two with strong ligature with doubled thread, and heat that moisture over the fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	Then insert the end of the clyster into the cervix.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And then press your hand on the bladder with pressure descending so that the patient feels that that moisture has already pervaded the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	But if you do not have a bladder at hand, then take a piece of parchments and make of that a circle; and pierce that in all its rotundity; and then insert strong thread into those holes, thus as it revolves, and then put the circle as it is put together, because when you put in that what you want of moisture, oil and water.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And then you insert that into the instrument and do with it as you did with the bladder, and express with your hand until moisture reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Chapter 60.
De extraccio de peyra.	On the extraction of stones.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already spoken in the division of stones about their kinds and the cure of them by medicines, as well as the difference between stones formed in the kidneys and those formed in the bladder, and their signs.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have spoken about that kind of stone which requires operation by hand, and incision.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And the stone formed in the bladder itself is that which is lodged in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And I will briefly narrate that with a clear exposition.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	I say that stones formed in the bladder most often occur in children. And their signs are that the urine that leaves the bladder is like water in its thinness, and it appears in that sand; and the patient feels burning when he urinates, and often has difficulty urinating; and with this there may be blood in his urine.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And it is difficult to cure this in the old, but easier in children who have reached the age of 12.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	But it is milder for them because they are younger.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And if the stone is larger, its cure is more difficult; and if smaller, the contrary.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore, when we come to the cure of this, we should first cleanse the patient with a clyster that opens up the entire passage which is in his bowels; for sometimes that opening prevents the expulsion of the stone after examination.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And then let the patient be laid on his back and made to groan and strain in order that the stone may descend into the bottom of the bladder, or jump up from its place sometimes.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And then let him make an effort with his arms and legs while he is lying on his back, so that the whole bladder may be made to decline towards its lower parts.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And then let him make an effort to urinate.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	Therefore, if you feel the stone in that space, then you should cut it at once.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if it does not come out at all by your touch, then let the patient smear oil on his left index finger or middle finger if he is a child, or the tip of the little finger if he is an adult, and insert that in his anus.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And so let him expel the stone by pushing it with his finger.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And gradually push that into the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	And then press on it with your finger, and expel it out through the place where you made the incision.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And command the assistant to press the bladder with his hand; and command another assistant to extend the testicles upwards with his right hand, and with his other hand to press on the scrotum beneath the testicles, in the part where the incision is made.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then insert the spatulum so that its narrow end enters first; this is how it should be done:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	and cut into the space between the anus and testicles, not in the rectum, in front of the left testicle; and let the incision be over the stone and the incision on the finger be in the anus, and let the incision be transverse, so that the opening is wide and the wound narrow according to the size of the stone that can be expelled from it without any compression, for fear of the finger being crushed in the wound.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And know that there is some stone whose angles and edges make its emission difficult for that reason.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And that is like a grape in shape, and it is round, and it is easier to expel from it.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	Therefore, if it is the kind whose angles and edges are sharp, insert it into the incision.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not easily expelled, then let you push on that or tighten it with a decent grip, the end of which should be like a file by which to tighten around the stone, and not slip off it; or insert below it a slender instrument with a curved end.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	But if you cannot move it, then let you enlarge the wound a little, and if you see blood flowing, stop it with burnt vinegar.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	But if there are more than one stone, then at the beginning push your finger to the mouth of the bladder, and then insert it over them; and then push in a little bit there; and do likewise if there are more than two.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if the stone is very large, then it is folly to insert that with a great incision, for there are two causes why this happens: either because the patient dies or he develops continuous urination because the wound is not completely healed.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	But let the assistant expel it when it is expelled, or insert it into the fracture with forceps so that he can extract it in pieces.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Therefore, when you have finished your operation, then fill the wound with cotton wool and dragon's blood, and tighten it.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And place a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or rose-oil and water, over it so that the wound may be cleaned by cauterisation.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	And then let him lie on his back, and not loosen the bandage until the third day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when he has loosened it, wash the wound with water and oil, and then cure that with ointment of diafenicon and ointment of diabasilon until it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	But if the wound becomes hot and ulcerated, and it seems as though the blood has congealed in the bladder, and there is no urination (and that is called by the egress of blood with urine), then insert your finger into the wound and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will provoke corruption of the bladder and putrefaction.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then wash the wound with sharp wine, water and salt, and apply to it all manner of remedies, by which means he will be cured until he is healed.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And let him lie on his back during all the cure, and you apply both testicles and adjust the medicines which are laid upon the wound.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the stone is small and lodged in the urethra, and there is no urination, then cure that by what means you can insert it before the incision is made, for there are many remedies which have been proved to be effective against this; and indeed you can use an iron punch covered with velvet, of which this is the form:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	triangular in shape, pointed, made on a stick.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	And then take a punch and insert it into the urethra below the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And then insert the iron into the urethra, piercing with ease until the punch reaches the stone.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And turn the punch with your hand around that small stone little by little, and pierce it from both sides so that you can penetrate it from the other side; for the urine is then absorbed.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	And then press your hand over the opening so that it is tight around where the stone was before the urethra was pierced, for that is cramped, and there is no egress of urine, and the patient is healed.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	But if this cure is not prepared for any reason which prohibits it, then insert an iron below the stone, and another iron above it.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And then you light a fire on the stone in that groin between two ligatures.
E aprop extratz aquela.	Then take out that object.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	Then untie the ligament and clean the clotted blood which is caused by the plague.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And the ligament of the bladder is not necessary except to prevent it from returning to the vesica, and the other ligament above except that when the bladder is untied the cord returns to its place and cures the plague.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And for this reason when you tie the bladder above, you must lift the cord to the parts above so that it returns to its proper state and cures the plague as we have said.
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter 61.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	On the extraction of stones from women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Stones in women are seldom generated.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	But if you see a stone in one of them, then its cure is difficult and prohibited by many methods.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of these is that the woman is very young.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second is that you do not find a woman who knows how to examine her if she is chaste or is one of those married women.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third is that you cannot find a woman skilled in this art, especially for the operation with your hand.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth is that the site of the incision for a stone in women is distant from the site of the stone, so it requires a deep incision and there is fear in that.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	But if necessity compels you to do this, then know that you must take a female doctor who is very skilled, and she is seldom found.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	But if you lack that, then seek a skilled doctor and subtle or present a female midwife skilled in the affairs of women or a woman who in this art has made progress in the art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	So do that presentation and command her to do everything you order her to do from the inquiry about the stone at the beginning; the cause is that she examine whether the woman is a virgin then know that she puts her finger in the anus of her and feels for the stone.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	So if she finds it, hold that under her finger and then command her to insert it into that.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	But if she is not a virgin, then command the midwife to insert her finger into the vulva and feel for the stone, since she places her left hand over the bladder, and grip that with good pressure.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	So if she finds it, then know that gradually pull that from the orifice of the bladder to the parts below with the top of her finger which came through that to the root of the groin.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	Then insert into that the tip of the finger from the vulva over the root of the groin from whatever part it is stopped at and grasp the stone in that part, and the finger of her not be pushed back by the stone holding it there.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the incision should be small at first; then insert the needle into that incision and if she feels the stone, then make a second incision according to the amount she knows the stone will be pushed out of that.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And know that the kinds of stones are many: for some of them are small and large and lean and rough, and long and round having horns.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	So you know how many species there are of it therefore you signify above what you want.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you see bleeding, apply verdigris crushed and wet that for an hour while the blood is clotted, then return to your operation when the stone has been pushed out.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And prepare with you the instruments which you use in the extraction of stones in men so that you are aided by those in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you see bleeding and know that the discharge of blood is from the artery which is cut, then you place powder on the site and tighten that with a ligature, and do not touch that; let go of the stone and do not extract it for the woman will surely die.
E aprop cura la plagua.	Then cure the plague.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	So when the sharpness of the bleeding has ceased, and the site is healing, then you return to your operation when the stone has been pushed out.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter 62.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	On incision for hernia acute.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	Hernia aiguo is nothing but an accumulation of moisture in the white membrane which is below the diaphragm containing the intestines and is called the sac.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And sometimes it is in the proper membrane which nature has prepared in the part of the sac while it is another sac; and it is the diaphragm between the white membrane which we have said, and that is nothing but fat.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is from weakness which occurs to the intestines, for to those is poured out that matter, and sometimes occurs by blow made upon the intestines.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And that moisture has many colors for the color of it inclines to yellow or blood-red or red or is black and sludgy, and that is what is most.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the marks by which it is known that this accumulation of water is in the white membrane which we have said, then the pustule is round declining a little to length thus with figure of sac and appears the intestine for the moisture contains all parts.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the moisture is in the proper membrane then the pustule is round with part of the sac and for that man estimates that it is another sac.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the moisture is between the diaphragm of the intestines and the white membrane then cut below the center.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And when you want to know the color of the moisture then you try the color of the moisture in the pustule with a needle of which the point is preceded; and according to what comes out on the tip of the needle judge about what there is inside it.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	So when we come to the cure of it with fire then know that we command the patient to be bled if that is possible for you, and see the body of him full.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	Then let it be resupine over his back on any cause a little higher, and place below him pieces of linen.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	Then sit on the left side of him and command the midwife to follow on his right side and she extend her finger to one of two sides to the diaphragm of the intestines and at the part of the navel of the belly.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	Then take a flat knife and cut the diaphragm of the intestines of the middle location for the length inside near the anus.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And let the incision be made according to right-angle equally distant from the line which should pass through the hair of the intestines, so that it comes to the white membrane including it.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	Excise that and observe, and beware lest you not insert it; and your incision with which you excise it by part cuticle which is suspended at the sac more and scrutinize with your incision according to the amount possible for you.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	Then pierce the sac full of water with wide perforation, and extract all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	Then separate between two lips of the incision with pincers and extend the sac to the parts above; and do not touch the diaphragm of the intestines containing it and insert the sac in that way which is possible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	Then insert that with its totality or in pieces and especially its sides slender for if you do not scrutinize the incision of it strictly there is not assurance that the water will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	But if the hernia protrudes through the opening in his abdomen during your operation, then when you have finished the incision of the scrotum, return it inside and sew the two lips of the abdominal wall of the scrotum with a stitch, and treat it as you would any other wound until it heals.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you find the hernia腐ed by another disease, then cut the vessels which are under the suspensory ligament, remove the hernia, and treat it with what we have said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	But if the hernia is divided into two parts, then you should know that there are two hernias; therefore, operate on that part in the same way as you did on the other; and if it seems to you that it is one operation, then perform it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And you should wipe away the blood, and enter into the incisions wool soaked in oil or in rose oil; and put outside another wool which you have soaked in wine and oil, and spread it over both testicles and the scrotum; and place on top folded cloths and powders, and tie those with a ligature which is according to this form:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	and let there be two pieces of cloth and they are filled with wool dyed red according to this semblance; and the ends with which it is pressed are made of string or of wet wool, and they are tied tightly in the waistband of the underpants, and one end goes from the back between the two, and the second goes to the front part of the scrotum, and two ends on each side go below and the other two on the sides, and all fastening is tightened in the waistband of the underpants.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with cautery instead of an incision with iron; and you should take a sharp cutting cautery and insert it into the scrotum of the testicles, and ignite it according to what we have recommended until the white sac containing the hernia is exposed, and then you should use cautery according to this form:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	and it is like the Greek letter alpha.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And you should pierce with that cautery, and ignite it until all moisture is driven out.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	And you should extend the scrotum with tongs, and cut it with tongs, and cauterize with a sharp cautery ignited; and insert it according to what is possible for you until you have removed everything; and beware of the hernia that the fire does not touch it.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And know that this operation is more safe and more distant from bleeding, and better than an operation with an incision.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	But if you see an abscess formed in the hour of incision or in the hour of cautery, or bleeding, then you should treat whatever inconvenience there is for you with treatment which suits it according to what has been said.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	But if the patient is fearful and does not await the second operation because of its horribleness, then you should perform piercing according to what I have recommended; and it is when it is certified that you must, by what we have said about the significators, know that the hernia is aqueous.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Then you should have the patient lie on his back on a high bed, and pierce the abscess in its lowest part with a broad spatula, and make the piercing according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And the opening should be large enough for all the water to flow out.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	And you should place string and tie it there, and leave it, so that the remainder of the water flows out.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And you should treat it until the wound is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	But if there is an inconvenience in the emission of the hernia in that hour when you pierce it: and this is not done except because the white membrane in the opening of the wound causes inconvenience and prohibits the emission of the hernia, then you should put into the wound a needle or instrument with which the hernia is extracted from the hydrocele, the form of which is preceded; or place under pressure on the hernia a small ball.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And know that the hernia returns, and is held back for several months or years; and when it is accumulated, then it should be pierced according to that same manual method, for thus will the patient pass his days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter .lxxxiii.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	Of incision on a fleshy hernia and its treatment.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	Know that in the incision on this hernia, there is usually great fear of death in those with the most disposition; for I have seen the dismissal of it and being saved by that better.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And I am remembering the operation on that one and the species of the abscesses.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, I say that abscesses arise in the bodies of which the testicles are composed and it is done for many causes: or by acute acute superfluity, which is secreted to the testicles, or by piercing.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body, and there is no pain in it, and it is a heavy abscess.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And very often it is an abscess calcified, of which the color is dark, and there is no sensation in it.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And sometimes it is done by a node of the membranes, and by inflammation of those from which there has already been perceived a memory of it, or by inflammation of the veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	But that which is by inflammation of membranes is known by the dispersion of the abscess when you compress it with your fingers; and it should not be touched.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	But that which is done by inflammation of a vein is not dispersed at all for any cause because of compression with the fingers.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that on this species there should be incision and on the other meats; and you should insert the scrotum of the testicles, and extend the hernia to its parts above, and extract it from the white sac, and ligature the testicles, and insert them into the sac after you have extracted it from all parts of the hernia.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Therefore, if the hernia is already consolidated in those meats, then you should extract the hernia and insert it.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is adhesion for any cause of the scrotum, or between that which is between the sacs, then you should loosen all that adhesion and insert it by a round incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	But if there is raw flesh in the place of the adhesion which is behind, then you should insert all that is of it and extract the hernia as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when your operation is complete, then fill the wound with wool soaked in rose oil and wine; and treat it with the other treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter .xciv.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	Of the treatment of hernia which is of veins.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	Veins is an abscess wrapped in any wrapper similar to a swelling with softening of the testicles, and there is difficult exercise and walking on the patient.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the treatment of this disease, it is by fear for that from which is preceded memory.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, let us examine its operation according to those which are first.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And I say that you should have the patient lie on his back on a high bed; and tighten the testicles to their lowest parts with cords; and you should tie the scrotum of the testicles to its lowest part with cords according to what has been proven in the rod; and hold those other servants which you have, and extend them with violent extension.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And you should insert with a broad spatula through an incision transversely in the right of the sacs until they are exposed.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And then you should remove all hair from the affected area, as we have said before regarding hair removal using archery tools, which are in the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	Then you should insert a double-headed needle into those places where there are veins, and tie one end of the thread to the front of the affected area, and the other end to the back of it.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	Then you should cut into them in the middle, according to the length of the body, and extract what is accumulated from the fetid and putrid humors.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And then you should treat the wound with a cure for other wounds in which you want pus to be generated, so that the vessels which have become black from one of two things may fall away, which is not harmful.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	But if the veins are affected everywhere, then you should either extract the testicles or tie off the vessels connected to them, so that they are deprived of all nourishment through the cutting of the vessels, and that they wither away, or else that they are tied off so that there is no benefit to them.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter 65:
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	On the treatment of intestinal hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The cause of this hernia is due to an opening that occurs in the diaphragm extending over the belly, from which some intestines protrude through that opening.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture is either of the diaphragm or due to an incision there, and these two types occur for various reasons: due to a blow, or from jumping, or from shouting, or from lifting something heavy, or from similar activities.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	And the sign of this, when it is due to an extension of the diaphragm, is that it occurs gradually over a long time, and not suddenly, and there is swelling underneath the skin due to the diaphragm compressing the intestine.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the sign of this type is that it causes intense pain right away; and there is a diverse appearance of swelling below the navel, and this is due to the protrusion of the intestine, and the body is pushed out at the edges of the diaphragm.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And sometimes the intestine slips out with its covering, and this type of hernia is called intestinal hernia with a sac.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And sometimes it occurs due to hernia with a sac, and sometimes there is a tear in the intestine, and it gets stuck there, and this causes great harm to the patient, and sometimes it causes intense pain especially when it is pressed upon.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in treating this illness with iron, there is fear involved because it is easy to damage the intestines.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And the method of performing this operation is that you command the patient to draw in his intestines with his hand into their cavity if he obeys your instructions, and then have him lie on his side between your hands, and lift his legs up.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And then you should tighten the skin that covers the testicles at the top, and cut all around the testicles with your knife; and then insert two hooks into the incision to pull it open according to what you command them to do.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if the incision is as large as it needs to be so that nothing of that which has slipped out is left behind, then you should close it up.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And then you should remove the skin that covers the diaphragm under which the testicles are located, and reveal the white and firm diaphragm underneath in each area.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	Then you should put your finger into what holds the testicle, in what is between the white diaphragm and the diaphragm below, and between the diaphragm according to its location, and release it from the adhesion that is in the back part of the abdomen.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And then you should hold the skin of the testicles at their openings, and extend the white diaphragm with your left hand, and lift up the abdomen with the diaphragm to the side of the incision; and command the assistant to extend the abdomen inwards while you release the adhesion that is behind it with a complete solution.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And close with your fingers so that there is no cause for the intestine to be wrapped in the white and firm diaphragm.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	But if you find any cause for it, then you should push it back into the abdomen.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And then you should take a needle made of six threads, and insert it behind the diaphragm below the testicles, which is where the incision occurs; and then you should pierce through both ends of the thread so that they stick out like horns, and then you should attach one end to each horn with a strong ligature made of two parts.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And then you should wrap the ends of the threads and tie them with a strong ligature so that none of the vessels which cause blackness can pass through, so that there is no chance of swelling due to cauterization.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And place another bandage according to the wound after the first bandage, a distance of three fingers; and leave these two bandages loose from the scrotum which is below the testicles the quantity of the size of the finger, and wind all the rest according to the roundness, and hold it by the hole.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And then cut at the end below the scrotum through a section from which blood and pus will flow, as we have recommended in what we have said.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And then administer wool soaked in oil, and place it on the wound; and administer the bandage which we have recommended (and sometimes the scrotum is cauterized white, which we have said close to the cut of it they fear the flow of blood, because many times these occur) and leave the bandage so that by itself it falls.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	But if the falling of it is delayed, then let water and lye be heated, and place it on that area so that it falls according to what we have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the wound with another cure for wounds so that it heals.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter 66.
De hernia ventosa.	Of a wind hernia.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia I have not seen anyone who has been burned on the cure of it with iron.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first said that it is made thus as we have recommended in the hernia that is with wine; which is that you tie the vessels close to the section on it with ease of it; and then dry in the middle place around the abscess with that which opened it, while the vessels fall.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And cure the wound as we have said so that it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter 67.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	Of the rupture that is made in the intestines.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Sometimes this rupture in the intestines as we have said, and they project the place.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And do not give any cause to the bowels by the bowels; and if they give, it is little; and return in all hours.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	But if the time with that is prolonged, it is a fissure in the scrotum so that the intestine descends into the scrotum; and this happens because of the extension of the scrotum which is in the intestines as we have said, the cause of which is that the scrotum is extended, and then it becomes soft, and the place is an abscess and projects.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the cure for it is with cautery as it is preceded by the narrative of it.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And sometimes it is cured with iron in this way: and let the patient lean over on his back between their hands, and then dry the place of the rupture of the abscesses that project with a cut according to its width according to the quantity of three fingers.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then strengthen the white scrotum which is below so that it is uncovered.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And then take the band and place it over the prominent place of the scrotum, and press it on the abdomen.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And then sew the two prominent places on the end of the band of the scrotum, and adjust one of those to the other with the stitch.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And then cut the end of the band, and do not cut into the scrotum at all, nor extend the hole, nor cause anything else so that you have knowledge in the cure for intestinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And then cure it with the cure for wounds, and as you insert the threads, cleanse that and restore the wound so that it is consolidated; because the scrotum is contracted and the eminence of the rupture is not adjusted.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cautery is better in this place because it is closer to health.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter 68.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	Of softening of the scrotum of the testicles.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	Many times the scrotum of the testicles in some men is softened because the flesh that is between there is softened, and it is weakened by the guard of it.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Then it is necessary for the one who is asked in the cure of it to let the patient lie on his back, and heat all the scrotum which is softened over the natural scrotum; and then sew two lips with a stitch.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you want, cut in the beginning the superfluity of the softened scrotum with three or four cuts and with a firm stitch.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And then insert between the stitches; and then cure by the cure for the other wounds so that it is healed and the threads fall.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter 69.
De castracio.	Of castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	Know that castration in our law is excommunicated, but by cause it has been read to me that I remember it in this book; and it is not necessary to remember it except for two ways, of which the first is so that it is in the science of the doctor when it is questioned about it, who knows the cure of it when it happens; and the other way is that we many times have need of castration of other beasts because of our young ones for them, as of horses, and of oxen, and of pigs, and of those similar to the beasts.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And so I say that castration is done in two ways: or by tearing, or by cutting at an incision.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	But in that which is done by tearing, the way of the operation is that we let the beast swim in water so that its genitals are softened and they hang.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	And then take those with your hand so that they are resolute and do not appear beneath the touch.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	But in castration done by incision and cut, take hold of the scrotum of its testicles with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	And then ligate the suspensory ligament, and insert on each hole with one cut so that two holes are processed.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And then insert those pus which you will have scooped out.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not let any cause happen on them of the scrotum, except for the subtle scrotum which is over the veins.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this way of castration is better which is done by tearing because tearing leaves no cause to the testicles so that the beast desires copulation.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And then cure the wound so that it is healed.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter 70.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	Of the cure for hermaphrodites.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphrodites in men are according to two ways: the one is when or appears in that which has the space between the scrotum of the testicles, in that one which is between two testicles figure a clitoris of woman in which there are hairs.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And sometimes from that urine in the scrotum of the testicles.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	But in women it is one species: and it is that the clitoris of the woman over the foreskin is thus like two testicles of man a little bit of all are joined at the entrance of the vagina thus with the foreskin of man and two testicles.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the cure is of three species: of two of men and one species of women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And it is that take hold of those flesh tightened so that the pressure of that escapes, and then cure those with the cure for the other wounds.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second species of men of which urine is in the scrotum of the testicles, there is no cure nor operation on it.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 71.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	Of a swelling and prominent flesh by cause of women.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	A strong swelling is tightened over natural causes so that it is stressed and is done the guard of it; and sometimes it is magnified in some women as much so that it spreads also in men and it pierces during intercourse.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Then you should have the superfluity of linen with your hand or with ointment and insert it.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not finish the insertion, especially at the root of the nail, so that there is no flow of blood.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	Then treat that with a cure for the wounds until it is healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	A hernia is a swelling that arises in the groin of the mother and fills up that space; and when it is pushed out of its cavity it resembles a tail (and because of this some doctors call this "tailed malady"). Therefore we should insert into it as we would into a wound, and treat it until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter 72:
De curacio de alratica.	Of the treatment of elephantiasis.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Elephantiasis is when the vagina of a woman is not perforated, or the opening is small.
E es o natural o accidental.	And it can be natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental is due to a previous illness, and this happens when the flesh is very tight or there is an issue with the bones or they are narrow.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	And it can happen in the groin of a woman, or in her ribs, or in the upper or lower abdomen, and it is prohibited from coitus and pregnancy, and menstruation is very much prohibited.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	And its knowledge is gained through observation by the midwife, if the pregnancy is obvious, then it's clear; but if it is not obvious, then you should feel for it with your fingers or with a rod.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	But if the pregnancy is due to a narrow canal and it is close to both labia, then you should cut into it and rupture it.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And it is where you place powder on both labia, and then you place your fingers between the lips in order to push.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the woman should be on her back, with her legs extended and spread wide open, then you should also spread both labia widely with force so that the narrow canal is broken and the pregnancy is opened up.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And then take wool and soak it in oil and place it on the wound, and keep it moist for a day so that the incision does not close up.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	But if the canal is wide and thick, then you should insert it with a broad spatula or a blade of myrrh.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	But if the pregnancy is due to a hernia, then suspend it with ointment and insert that.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And you should have the medicines that stop the flow of blood without biting, like astringent medicines, and dragon's blood, and incense, adjusted with egg white.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And then administer a broad bandage of lead so that the wound is not loosely closed.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And hold it for several days and administer cool water.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	Then it should be treated with the other cure of consolidation until it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And sometimes there are accidents in the mother's childbirth of other flesh, and then you should insert it according to this method.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	But if it is due to scurvy, then there should be no contradiction with iron in any way.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter 73:
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	Of the cure for hemorrhoids, and of tail and red buttock that happens in the vagina of women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids are an appearance of small veins openings from which blood flows continually from them; and when they are ancient hemorrhoids, they are made like this.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And I have already said in the division of those and their signs, and to say thus those that receive cure and those that do not receive cure.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore I say that hemorrhoids and these when they are in the groin of a woman and do not appear in sentiment, then in those there should be no cure with iron.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	But those which are in the opening of the vagina above the one on which there is sentiment, these are the ones that are cured.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And you should put the woman in a warm bath and then spread those with tweezers or with rough cloth, and insert them with the nails.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And then sprinkle on them one of the powders that cause the flow of blood without biting, like cassia and similar to those.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And then let her feet be covered for an hour, and then place that in cool water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the flow of blood persists, then make for her a decoction of hemp and of onion peels and of pomegranates and of similar things.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And then take flour of bran and cook that with honey and sour wine and make a poultice with it over his back.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the blood is dried up, then that is good; but if not, make it adhere with two ventouses, and to the breasts without scarification.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then take wool and soak it with juice of mallows or with juice of holly or with juice of alder with red wine, and make the poultice adhere to the wound; and then cure the wound with unguent until it is healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	But that hard lump which is of rough guard, you should insert that which appears to you from that according to what I have said in that dressing.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And cure that until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter 74:
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	Of accidental piercing of the vagina.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Many kinds of hemorrhoids happen in the vagina, like scurvy and hemorrhoids with teeth and ulcerous and suppurative and erpetromas and fistulas that are bloody and raging, and other hemorrhoids.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already said these illnesses and their kinds and their signs, and their cures in the division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And you should know in this treatise of hemorrhoid cauterization which appears in the vagina when it is of the kind that comes from hemorrhoids that cause pain, and if you wish to know in what way its operation is done with iron.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Therefore you should consider if the pain of the hemorrhoid in its beginning is acute with percussion and phlegm and fever, and it throbbs and if there is sentiment over it, then do not cauterize it, and cure that with what helps on the maturing until the acuity of the accidents cease.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And then you should make the woman lie on her back with two pillows that she leans on two pillows; and recline on her back and adjust her feet to the part below the belly, and let her thighs be spread out, and place her arms below her elbows, and hold each one with a cloth convenient.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	And then the midwife should follow the right side and administer the instrument by which the opening of the vagina is opened, the shape of which will come in those causes that we will do next.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And when you wish to administer this instrument that you place the nail on the groin of the woman's vagina, and that which of the instrument goes into the vagina is not more than the groin of the vagina and leads the nail.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	But if the instrument is larger than the groin of the vagina, then you should place powder on the texture of the groin of the vagina so that there is a prohibition against the insertion of any instrument in the groin of the vagina.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And you should place the needle that goes in the instrument of the side above it and that the minister holds the instrument and rotates the needle until it is opened the vagina.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when the incision appears and it is touched by hand and is cold and moist, then you should dry that with a broad spatula.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the pus has been drained, then you should apply a poultice soaked in rose oil or green oil with some astringent to the wound; and place a bandage over the incision, pressing on the vein of the arm.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And place wool soaked in water with crushed mallows outside the arm and over the elbow.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then it will be healed within two days with ointment that should be applied until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And sometimes the arm and wound are washed with water and honey, and then with water in which is soaked rue or long pepper, and then return to the ointment.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the wound is deep in the arm that has been cut, then you should not use iron in its treatment but rather use what we have said in the division above.
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter 75:
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach midwives how to treat living fetuses when they appear in an unnatural shape or form.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	It is necessary for the midwife to know the appearance of a natural childbirth in the beginning, and when you see the woman expressing pain in her lower abdomen and desiring to breathe in air, and upon this she is moved by what is above her, and the fetus exits with its head, and the second one comes out above or is suspended from the umbilical cord.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	When you see these signs, then the belly should be compressed so that the fetus exits gently; when it exits with its head, the second one comes out, and it is cleaned of those superfluities by good cleaning.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu .i., o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	But that which is different from this childbirth is not natural and not laudable; when the fetus exits on its feet and the body exits before the head and the feet, and one of its hands, or at the foot, or exits its head and hand, or at the belly, and quickly turns onto his neck, and resembles these non-laudable forms.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	And it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all these causes, and guard against error and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And they will show all the forms of these, and which element is in those so that it can be known by what it is and what has happened to it.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the fetus exits with its head from natural labor, and it is violent upon the woman and a difficult birth for her, and she sees the child's strength already weakened, then do that cutting, or if the women hold the child, and evaporate its moisture with fenugreek powder and warm oils.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	Then the midwife should insert a small spatular knife between its lips and open with that the second one, or dry it up with her fingernail to remove moisture.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press the woman's belly so that she gives birth.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	But if it does not exit, then the woman should be cleansed with a poultice of bran and a poultice of fenugreek with honey.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And after that cleansing, command the midwife to compress and cause that sneezing with conditioning; and hold the mouth of the child and its nose for an hour, because the child will be forced out immediately.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if both of the child's hands are forced out at the beginning, then you should reduce those with gentle compression little by little.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	But if it does not obey the instrument, then place the woman on a bed and lift its feet up, and lean the bed towards the earth; and the woman should be held so she does not fall from the leaning.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the hands are not turned in and the fetus is dead, then insert those and pull out the fetus's limb or tie the body to the hand with a cloth and pull that with equality, because that will be forced out.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	Of the exit of the fetus on its feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the fetus exits on its feet, then you should push those up and turn the fetus gently, and grab one of its feet and extend those gently little by little.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	But when it exits into the thighs, then you command that he be expressed, and do that sneezing with conditioning, because it will exit if God wills it.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it is not exited with what we have recommended, then return the fetus gently to its natural form; because it will exit immediately with gentle exit.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is prohibited by everything we have recommended, then take of mixture of alder and dissolved gum, and pound all in the mortar with good pounding, and line with that the womb of the woman, from the bottom of her belly to her chest.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And then do that cutting in tepid water so that it reaches its diaphragm.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when you see the lower parts of him softened, then do to him smoke of myrtle and place that below him.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when you have done the smoke for one hour, then make him sneeze on a bed and cause that sneezing and open his mouth, and lift from that, and press the lower part of her belly gently, because the fetus will exit immediately.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Exit of the fetus over its shoulders and hands.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the fetus exits in this form, then you should gently insert its hands little by little; and the woman should be bent over so that its feet are pointing down, and its hands are held up, and those should be placed on the sheet, and its hands completed.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	Then press gently on her belly little by little, and then pull out what is below its feet from the armpits so that it is prepared in the lower part.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the fetus is not forced out, then grab its feet and move those violently, and then press what is above the diaphragm little by little so that the fetus can reach the parts above it.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	Then insert its hands and gently turn the fetus little by little, and command the woman to express so that the fetus exits.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Exit of the fetus hanging down from one of its hands.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	It should be pulled into reduction by the hand, but if it cannot be reduced, then lift the woman and make her bend.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if she cannot bend, then make her lie down on the sheet and strike her thighs with violent compression, and then administer to her remedies which moisten and are recommended from mucilages.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And when labor comes, then make her sneeze on the bed and study the reduction of the hand, and turn the fetus to its natural form, and make the woman sneeze and command that he be pressed onto himself so that it exits.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Exit of the fetus on its neck with its arms and chest expanded and its belly towards the mother's back.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	And let the midwife hold the fetus's hand and then turn that gently little by little, and that it has ease.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when he is out and turned, then place what we have recommended of oil and poultices over his navel.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And then command him to hold his mother's hand little by little, and when that is done, make her sneeze on the bed and command that he be leaned over onto his right side, and then command that he be compressed; and do that sneezing with conditioning.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	The prepared fetus exits the side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When you see the mother giving birth in this way, consider and then insert your finger inside so that the moisture is evacuated.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the fetus is suspended above its face and neck, then insert that of the umbilical cord, so that it is not retained and delayed.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	Then cover the fetus in its parts as you put that which covers it, and command the woman to squeeze herself a few times, and she will force it out with an easier birth if God so wills.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	The exit of twins or multiple fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Know that twins are often born many times, and sometimes three or four, but this is strange and rare; but their causes come from nature, and not alive.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And know that there are those, although they are multiplied, one is a twin, and they are separated by the head, distinguishing them between the ligament in the umbilical cord of each of them. And sometimes they are forced out as if it were one fetus with an easy natural birth, and sometimes their exit is non-natural as we have described.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if they are difficult to give birth and reach what we have said about the non-natural shapes, then you must treat them as we have recounted.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the midwife does what she does with ease and subtlety, and with delay, and is ingenious according to all shapes as it is prepared for her by bringing health.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Recollection of that which is formed in the womb from embryos and abortions.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Some women have one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and sometimes even ten fetuses, and I have indeed seen a woman who aborted six fetuses all formed, the cause of which was discovered by the wise physicians through measurement.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all of that cover what it is in the science of the midwife how strong she goes to that small thing resembling that, and then pause if at that.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter .LXXVI.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	On the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you treat the dead fetus with what we have said in the division of medicine and is not forced out, and you are forced to use incision with your hand, then consider if the woman is of healthy nature and has none of the accidents by which she is feared to lose.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Then the woman should be laid on her back, and his head inclined downward and his thighs raised.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	And the minister held that of two parts or be bound in the bed so that his body does not extend due to the extraction of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	Then you moisten the mouth of the mother of it with oils moistened and with mucilage of alder and fenugreek and of linseed.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	And the midwife moistens her hand with those oils and mucilage, and then inserts her hand with ease in the mother, and then surrounds her hand at the place where the nails are in the fetus.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	And convenient places in that: then you consider if the fetus is prepared to descend over his head, and then you put the nails in his holes, or in his neck, or in his mouth, or in his palate, or under his beard, or in the furcula of him, or in the close places of his sides, or under his armpits.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	But if the descent is over his feet, then in the ankle, or in the middle of his back.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And have the nail with your right hand, and pause the bend of it in that place which is between the fingers of the left hand, and insert the hand with ease and put the nail in some of those places which we have said, until he comes to the desired cause.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And then pause and put in the opposition of it another nail, or the third if necessary, so that it is equal attraction, and not extension according to its rectitude only.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	But be bent in every part, so that the exit of it is drawn out as it is done for the extraction of a tooth.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And in that between them that the extension is softened; and if any part of it is retained, then the midwife anoints her fingers with oil and inserts that remedy and turns it around that which is retained.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Therefore if the part of the fetus is forced out, then the nails are shifted to another place where there is need; and do that until all the fetus is forced out.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	But if the hand is forced out in front of the other, and it is not possible to return that by the bend of it, then have a cloth wrapped around it; and then extract it so that all of it is forced out, and insert that or in the joint of the hand or in the elbow.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And do the same to the other hand and feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	But if the head of the fetus is large, or there is constriction on it in its exit, or water in his head is tight, then insert between his fingers spongy sponge and split the head and extract the water, or uncover that with an instrument which is called “file”, the shape of which will come with the shapes of other instruments in the chapter which is next to this.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And similarly do if the fetus is of a large head by nature: and then insert that with alum, or take it with forceps as we have said; and then extract the bones with forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head is forced out and constricted by the furcula, then it is split so that the moisture which is in the feet is discharged.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	But if it is not complicated nor obstructed in exit, then you insert the head as much as possible to you.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the bottom of the belly is swollen or dripping in it, then perforate that so that the moisture in it runs out.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	But if the fetus is above its feet, then the attraction of it is easier and the direction of it to the mouth of the mother is easier.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	But if it is constricted by the belly and feet, then you extract that with a cloth which you have wrapped around your hand, and split the belly and feet so that what is in them runs out.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	But if the other members stand and turn the head, then the midwife inserts her left hand; but if the mouth of the mother is open, then insert the hand into the prenon of air, and surround it with that the head, and draw that with its fingers into the mouth of the mother, and then insert into him one nail, or two nails, and draw him with those.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mouth of the mother is constricted by an ulcer that comes to u, then let it not be pressed upon him; before, however, administer effusion of humid, fatty causes.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And apply plasters; and follow the patient in waters that soften and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the fetus is on his side, then if possible, it is twisted: and let what we have said in the living fetus be administered.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if that is not possible, then let it be inserted into vessels, and extracted.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And whoever does not leave out any cause inside the armpit.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed your operation, then administer what we have said about the treatment in boils that come from the greater humors.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if bleeding occurs, then let it flow into astringent waters and administer the other treatment.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And I have seen a woman whose belly was pregnant with a dead fetus, and on that fire another living one was carried, and then another fire with the dead one.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It happened that after a long time an abscess formed in his arm; and it swelled up that a fire opened, and it began to emit pus.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And I was called to cure him, and I treated him for a long time, but the plague did not heal.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then I placed on him some strong-吸引 bandages, and a bone came out of him, and after a few days another one came out; and I was very wondered how in the belly there were bones.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then I thought they were the bones of the dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Then I opened the wound and extracted many bones from him; the woman remained in the same condition, and she walked around like that for a long time, with a little limp.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And I did not think anything strange about it, but that in this there is science and assistance to what the doctor skill with his hand for curing administers.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Of the forms of the instruments which are necessary to extract the fetus.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Form of an incision through which the mother is opened:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of a ligature in which the intestines are tied, to that tying there are two virtues at both extremes of two threads.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	But let this virtue be more subtle than the ligature, and let it be made of cotton or linen cloth.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And the breadth of each strip is two fingers and the edges of both are one finger, and the length of each is a palm and a half; and in the middle part of the two strips there are two attachments of that linen cloth, the lengths of which are half a palm each, and the widths of each are two fingers, or a little more.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two attachments are interwoven in the mouth of the mother so that it is opened by them when you twist the two prescribed threads.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Other form similar to that more subtle and lighter:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	It is made of linen cloth or cotton according to the likeness of a forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	But at the end of it there are two attachments just like fingers, and the length of those attachments is about a palm, and the breadth of each is two fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open the mother with them, then let the woman be on her back with her feet hanging down, opening that which is between her thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	And open your hand with the instrument just as you do with tongs, according to the amount that you want of the opening of the mother's mouth in which the midwife makes it as you want.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of incision which the antiques said:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	Form of an incision by which the fetus is impelled:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	Form of an incision by which the large head is cut
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is like forceps in which there are teeth at the end just like fingers, and some times it is made long like forceps just like fingers, and its teeth are like those of a key with which it is cut and split.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Form of a small incision:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Form of an unction having a spine:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Form of an unction having two spines:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Form of forceps whose teeth close with which the head of the fetus is split:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	Form of a spatula having two ends by which the head is cut:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Form of two spatulas broad:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All those instruments are exercised, and when they are more easy for the artist and more due to the men because of their quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And it does not matter that you do not have those instruments, for there is no excuse for the need of them.
De extraccio de la segondina.	Of extraction of the second child.
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second child is retained because of the childbirth, then let you command the midwife to retain her milk, and then make her vomit with an emetic, and press your hand over her mouth and over her nose, and if she expels it by that means, well.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if not, then take a wool cloth and pierce it in the blanket, and place over that herbs which heat the mouth of the mother, like salt and rue and anise and camomile and Arabic scilla and cassia ligneous and sandalwood.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All those herbs or some of them are to be immersed in water on the cloth, and place that over the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And then place a hollow reed in the mouth of the mother, and hold that there while the evaporation comes to the cavity of the mother.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And then make her vomit as we have said, and the second child will be expelled with velocity.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	But if this cure is applied and the child has not been expelled, then command the midwife to immerse her left hand in sesame oil or in an infusion of marjoram, and then insert it into the vagina and press with that the second child, and when she has found the second child, pull it out little by little according to the rectum so that the mother does not suffer from too violent an extraction.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	First let it be moved to the right and left sides with ease.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And then the amount of attraction is adjusted, for she will obey and be drawn out from adhesion.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mouth of the mother is closed, we have already recommended the cure by an emetic and by the application of the cloth with herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	But if it is not expelled with all the causes we have recommended, then be assured that what comes out of her mouth lies at the crotch of the woman, and then christen her with unguent and tetramedication; for she will then be broken up within a few days and dissolved and expelled.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	But when it is raised bad odor to the head and stomach, and that upsets the midwife; then let potions and convenient remedies be administered to that.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	But some of the Ancients have been tried with sublimation of netherwort and of dry figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	Form of an instrument by which the woman is sublimated because of retention of menstrua and of the second child:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It is made of wood or of brass.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And the subtle end be placed in the vagina and the broad end over the fire, and the sublimation be placed over the coals of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And hold that there while it is consumed by that sublimation and repeat another.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	Of cure of the anus of the child not perforated.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	Children with narrow and swollen anuses, whose orifices are not perforated, and they have been pressed subtle and swollen.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then let the midwife pierce it with her finger; but if not, pierce it with an awl and guard that it does not touch the clitoris.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	And then place wool soaked in wine and oil over it; and let that wound heal while covered.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	But if you fear that it will become infected, then insert a cannula for several days and remove it when the infant wants to defecate.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And then it happens that the anus becomes blocked by the hardening of a ulcer or abscess; therefore when that hardening is cut into, it should be treated as we have said regarding the treatment and the lead.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	Regarding the treatment of fistula's that originate from there:
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistula's that originate near the beginning, discharge pus which is thin and watery and originate near the anus or in the space between the buttocks.
E es una fistula o motas.	And there is one or several fistula's.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And when that hardening becomes old and discharges thin white or yellowish pus, then some of these fistula's penetrate.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And these are known by what exits from them through the exit and by the flatulence: and sometimes the patient passes gas through it, and usually it is pus that exits from there.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And from these fistula's some sometimes penetrate into the bladder and into the urethra: and there are some that penetrate into the joint of the hip and into the root of the tailbone.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And how you know a fistula has penetrated into the anus and not penetrated is that you put your finger inside the anus, and you insert a thin piece of ram or iron into the fistula when it is not painful.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	But if in that one there is pain, then insert into it a thin piece of lead or horse hair while you feel the piece or the hair with your finger.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel anything at all or there is no sign of digestion nor flatulence nor gas, then know that it has not penetrated, and then go to the treatment.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula has penetrated into the bladder or urethra, then it is indicated by the exit of urine and a prohibition of it to that place until the wound is healed.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	But if it has penetrated into the joint of the hip or into the bone and there is pain in the circle around it, then the sign of it is that you put a ram's horn into it if in the bone there is no pain, and there is pain in the circle of the joint: and from it pus exits all the time; and medicine does not help it nor is it healed with ointment.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all these penetrating fistula' there is no cure, and the treatment of them is the labor and vanity of foolish doctors who do not understand it.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	But in the one that is not penetrating and does not become old, healing with iron is expected according to what you have been told, and what has already happened and been tried.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And let the patient lie on his side with his upper body elevated and his legs bent upwards under him, with his buttocks inclined towards his stomach, then insert a piece of lead or ram's horn into the fistula until you know the location where the horn enters.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if he feels pain in his neck, then insert your finger into his neck.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel with your finger the horn already inserted through it pushing forward and there is something between your finger and the fistula, then know certainly that it has penetrated: therefore do not work on that one, for there is no healing in it as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	But however some say that it is healed in some people.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And the medicine by which there is hope of healing in him is that you apply cauterization gently according to the size of the fistula, as it is preceded, and insert that fire into the fistula until it reaches around his neck: and then repeat that two or three times until you know that all those fistula' which are like a feather of bird have been burned out.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	Then heal that one with hot water wrapped in cloth until all those meats which are burned out, and then heal that one with medicines that generate meat and consolidate, and if it is healed, well: but if not, then it will not be healed in any time by another treatment.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if the horn enters and does not penetrate into your finger which is in the anus, and between that and the horn there is a space of meat or burning, then let the fistula appear at where it breaks through the surface of the skin: then dry up the skin from where the fistula starts, and you dry them up with the horn, and let it be in the fistula until the incision reaches the place where the tip of the horn entered, and by the horn is freed and cut.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	Then cleanse those fistula' which are like a reed of bird and do not drain from them any cause.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	But if blood flows from it between you and your instrument when you press those meats, then the root that is and the pus of the wound is cauterized with fire or with sharp medicine, for cauterization with fire dries up two good humors: it is a drying up of those meats which are pressed, and an abscission of blood from the heat of the humors.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	Then heal that one with hot water wrapped in cloth or with raw cotton until the place is healed over with hard, generating meat which consolidates.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And it has medicines in which there is constriction and drying up: when then it is restored, it is healed and you should not fear an infection.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	But if the fistula has penetrated into the foreskin of the anus and is elongated from it over the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the anus and examine it.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And then if you feel the horn and between you and it there is burning or meat, and it is close to penetration, then there is not an operation in him unless by way of confidence and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	The which cause is to administer in him one of three ways: either that you cauterize it as we have said; or that you dry up that one until you can restore the cavity so that it is possible for you to insert the bandages and the treatment nearby; or that you do not process anything by incision so that you do not pierce the skin containing the neck, and that you approach over the patient exit of the digestion with his will; and then heal that one as we have said for it very much heals; or that you elongate that velvet and open that pus which is close to the anus, as we have said, or by horn or another instrument of acute tip, and then cleanse those fistula' which are in the incision where you can with pressure; and then strive to make the restoration of all the wound with incision, and if the orifice above is not consolidated, and the fistula breaks open in the part of the anus, and pus exits from it through the patient.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes the fistula is finished in this way: it is when you insert the horn into the fistula, and it is at the side of the anus around the surface of the body with the skin, then take the horn of perforated tip, which is as a needle prepares the ears according to this shape.
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	and then insert into it a needle wrapped in thread or around them: and then insert the horn into the fistula until you can restore its cavity.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	But if it has penetrated into the margin of the anus close to the inside, then you extract the needle from that incision so that you insert your finger in the anus: and extract the tip of the needle and adjust both tips together, and press them both, and let it be for one or two days, and when you insert the needle into the meat, press it until those meats are pressed which are between both tips of the needle and they close.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	Then heal the wound until it is consolidated and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	But if the opening of the fistula is not penetrating, then make it penetrate in whatever way you have prepared, unless there is motion in the leg, because it is not for you to do that so that you do not damage the nerve; and then heal the one inside until it is healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The shape of the spatulate tool with which the fistula is split: its curved part is very acute and the other part is not acute, so that you do not damage what is not necessary, as well as the times.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	On the sewing of hemorrhoids in which blood flows in the incision of those.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hemorrhoids are of two types, because either they are between the buttocks like charcoal, or they are like grass fat.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And some of them are small and large, and blood flows from them at all times, and they are one, and are found, and outside the anus, and on its edges.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	However, those that are outside the anus are according to the months of little humidity, of which citrine water or a little blood flows with a continuous body, and they are according to the color of the body.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the cure of that which is inside the anus is that you command the patient to sit and to be expressed until the anus dries and the hemorrhoids appear to you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you cut and suspend with nails or what you have those with your finger, and then cut those to their roots.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	But if the nails are not held in those due to their moisture and softening of them, then take those with rough cloth or twine or a piece of wool, and extract those with your fingers, and then cut those and spread some powdered powders on them near the incision so that they are like cauterization; or cauterize those according to what is preceded in the chapter of cauterizing.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And then heal those with the other cure until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the anus does not obey defecation, then christen the patient with a small bite of cinder, and he is washed with that water that is in the anus and he obeys defecation more easily when he is expressed.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	But if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then the cause of them is less, and it is that you take those with your finger or that you take those with a nail, and you cut those, and then heal those with what we have said until they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And whoever experiences an incision, believe that you administer a cure for them according to this way: take wax wrapped and insert it into the needle and then extract the hemorrhoids from their ends above, and let the needle penetrate with the other end of the wax, and wrap the two ends of the wax in the part below the needle, and tighten the hemorrhoid with a strong string, and heat the wax and extract the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And do this to all of them, and leave one and not cook it, so that the excess blood flows from it.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And then place on the anus a cloth soaked in rose oil or in ceratum, and place that over the anus and command the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then let it stay until it cools; and when it is cold, heal those with ointment or with another cure until they are healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	Of the cure of fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Many times they happen by dryness of a fissure or by constriction of nature.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And if they are old and not helped by that medicine, then you should cut those with the point of a spatulate tool or with your finger until they become wet and let the escorsa above be host, which prevents those from being consolidated; and then heal those until they are consolidated.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Then you obstinate those with a more violent incision than the first so that there is no blood and they are excoriated; and then heal those until they are healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	Of the cure of syphilis, it is a key.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	Know that syphilis is a key, and it is not unless the round spot according to the color of the body resembles the head of a nail, and it is done throughout the body and especially in the lower parts below the feet and at the ends of the fingers, and because of this you should feel pain.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And then let it be cut what is in the circle of the key, and let it be held with forceps or nails, and let it be eradicated from its root; and then heal that.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you want, cauterize the second as it is preceded in your chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	But a wart is a small rough round fistula on the surface of the body, and many times it comes to children's hands.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And its cure is that you stretch and cut that, or that you narrow it with wax or thread until it cools.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you want, cauterize that as we have said with fire or with acute medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And they are eradicated lengthwise and crosswise with the instrument by which you say.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	But an ant is a small furrowed or fistulated wart on the surface of the body, and when the friction hurts it is like a bite of an ant, and it is made around the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	And its cure is that you take a needle of goose feather or hawk's feather, and let it be strong, and place that over the wart so that it contains the circle of the needle from its ends; and then rotate your hand with the needle so that you cut what is in the circuit of the wart, and place that on the leg of the body, and eradicate the wart from its root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, do that with needle of ram or iron according to this form:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	Let the end above the needle be drawn to thinness, dull (so it is not perforated), wrapped so that over the finger the appearance of it is wiped and the revolution of that.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you want to cauterize the wart according to what is said before in the cautery of syphilis in the chapter of cauteries.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	Of the form of instruments that are administered to give cauterization.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Sometimes cauterization is done with silver or brass or molten ram or beaten; and sometimes it is done with those small instruments according to those which are administered, because that which is administered in the cure of small children is small; and that of those whose anuses are raw or painful, their cauteries are small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of a large and few cauterization:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The head of the needle above which the pouch is tied be broad according to this way; and let it be distinguished where the pouch is tied like that many times.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the end below it, which is inserted into the anus, be dull  (so it is not open), pushing to thinness; and on one side of it there are two incisions, and on the other side an incision, and let the width of the incision according to the thickness of the veins and more thick a small.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And let the pouch in which the medicines of animal bladder or wool skin are paused, and let its root be a palm.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And let it be perforated with small incisions as it is rolled; and if the space between the incisions is the thickness of the finger.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And then insert into those incisions strong hard wax of raw wax, or wind those; and tighten the pouch with that; and when it is paused on him, let the pouch be tight in the head of the cauterization between two distinguished by a strong constriction, and then cauterize each incision: But the quality of cauterizing with that is that you fill the pouch with medicine, which is warmed according to the quantity of the tolerance of the patient; and beware that it is not too hot nor too cold.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	And then the patient should be laid on their back, and their legs elevated, with a pillow placed underneath them, and a servant holding their legs, and another their chest, with their hands. And then the end of the cautery should be anointed with oil, or white wine, or a poultice of fenugreek, or similar; and then it should be inserted into the anus with ease, and the minister should squeeze the bag, expressing its contents with force until everything in the bowel is evacuated; and then the bowel should be extracted, and the patient should raise their legs to the wall.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine causes him to vomit, let him vomit as much as he can; and if he sleeps with it for the whole night, it is better for his healing.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	But if you cleanse him in stomach illnesses of vomiting and the discharge of his bowels, then you should repeat the cautery until he is healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if there are hemorrhoids or painful abscesses in the anus, then let the bowel be very thin and soft, with bowels from which children are born.
De curacio de las plaguas.	Healing of Wounds:
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	You have already said in the division of the healing of wounds what was fitting for the book, and I say thus the healing of those with hand and medicine according to need.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore I say that wounds are various according to what caused the wound and according to the location on which the wound occurred.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes by which many wounds are made are thus with stone, or incision of sword or knife, or impact of lance, or staff, or arrow, or similar to these from many causes.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	But the wounds that are in the locations of the body are thus with wound that falls upon the head, or neck, or foot, or belly, or throat, and similar to those in the limbs.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And I will discuss the healing of some wounds so that you may apply that reasoning and rule to other wounds.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And I will begin with simple wounds of the head, for the memory of the composite wounds will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Therefore I say that when a simple wound to the head occurs and there is no fracture, then consider: if it was from impact of stone or similar, and the vein has just been severed and there is a large wound and you fear an abscess will occur, then cut and tie the cephalic vein at once, and do not delay this; and draw out blood according to the amount of the injury's strength unless some cause prohibits phlebotomy, especially if the blood flowing from the wound is little.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And let the phlebotomy be on the opposite side of the wounded part; and keep the patient from replete and wine and heavy foods.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	But if some cause prohibits from the diminishment, then let it be lessened from the food and not approach meat or wine.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And place upon the wound, if it happens to him an abscess, a poultice steeped in warm oil or wine in which is mixed stiptic powder.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	But if it is secure from abscess, then place upon the wound, if it is fresh with its own blood and the air has not changed that powder which I will soon describe.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed that one, then place upon it some ointment until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	But if the wound is large or is from incision of sword and similar, and its lips are not closed by stitches, then close those with stitches according to how I will describe about their stitches.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	But if the wound is uncovered of bone and pen, and there is no retention of it but a small suspension, then insert that one and properly heal the wound with medicines and restore the meat by command to the patient that he abstain from foods in which are coarseness: heads and formen skin and similar to them, until it is healed.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you find in the bone putrefaction and it does not adhere to the bone, then insert all that is rotten and throw it out, and properly heal that one.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	But if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which blood can flow and it is not severed by medicines, then you inquire about the artery, and if you find that one unsevered, then you insert into it with spatulum, or ligature that one; and if necessity demands that we not do as we have said, then cauterize until the blood is severed.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these wounds are simple and small, then the cause of them is leeching; therefore you powder over those this powder, for it will harden before the air changes those.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	And the manner of the powder is this: take oil of unshorn ram, dragon's blood, and not-extinguished ash; be all pounded and sifted, and let the wound be filled with it, and be constricted by good compression until it adheres to that, and be coagulated by its own blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And then bind that one above with lint and let it be bound, and do not loose it while it is like this unless an abscess occurs, for the medicine will not heal until it is healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And sometimes use only cautery when you do not have unshorn ram and dragon's blood at hand.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And do this operation of binding in large wounds when it seems that it should be placed upon those and are tight, and are fresh with their own blood, which the air has not altered.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has altered them, and especially when it is in summer time, then there is no intent to the position of this powder, but then heal those with what we have said, therefore you place upon those some ointments digested, or that you place upon those plasters made from flour of wheat with water and honey until they are soft; and then heal them with the other healing within they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	But if it happens that the wound is fracture of bone, and it is small, then you extract that with forceps.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And I will tell the healing of fractures of the head in what is piercer.
De las plaguas del col.	Of wounds of the neck:
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	But if the wound occurs in the neck, then there is no difference in medicine, and it is among the wounds of the head when it is simple.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	But if the nerve of the neck is cut or artery, then if it is nerve, there is not in it artifice except that it be avoided healing of it with anything that makes vehement stiffness, therefore as cinchona and zeki that is vetiver oil and similar to them because they harm nerves and against that.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not place upon the wound any cause of all heat, for the substance of nerves is heat and its continuation is in the brain, which is the source of all members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if that which is healed by medicines cooling, therefore as it is washed with warm water, some vinegar infused in oil or not, and thucine when it is washed with warm water and the other stones minaret according to this manner, and ointments humid.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	But if the wound is large, then administer stitches, or narrow its lips, and then heal that one with lint until it is healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	But if the wound has depth or occurs to it the low pus broken, then pierce that one in its location but not deep-punched.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	But if in the wound an artery has already been cut and blood flow is achieved, then either ligature or cauterization of it should be performed, depending on what your need requires.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the ribs of the throat or all of them have been cut and the veins of the neck have been preserved, then you should stitch the edges of the wound over the throat with a needle and not touch it; instead, you should pull that area gently back into its natural shape and tie it tightly with a decent bandage; and you should treat that area with a poultice until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	But if the wound has caused a fracture in the bone, then you should probe it and extract any bone fragments that you can; and what you cannot remove, let it be lanced so that the wound may be cleaned out, separated from the bone, and the pus drained away.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the wound is fresh, then dust it with the powder that has been recommended to you.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	But if a fistula has formed in the wound, then treat it with what will be mentioned later in its own chapter.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Of wounds to the neck or similar, when they are made with a spear or halberd or lance or similar.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a spear or halberd wound and you see the depth of it, then consider whether there is any wind coming from the patient; then know that the wound is fatal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if it is not deep and the wound is fresh with its blood, then you should put on a powder at the first hour and not compress it so that the blood is not held back in its depth but returns to the heart and the patient is relieved; rather, apply an attracting poultice and loosen it twice a day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the poultice is not available to you, then put into the wound a piece of old cloth so that it draws out what is in there; and have the patient sleep on his back with his legs raised so that what is inside can flow out.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	But if three days or more have passed and the patient does not experience spasms or a bad tremor of the heart or a tightness in the chest, and you see other good dispositions, then know that the wound is healed; and then treat it with hot water and the other remedies until it is completely healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	But if its healing is delayed and the wound has been open for a long time, then know that a fistula has formed; treat it therefore according to its own chapter.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the wound is from a spear or halberd, and it is simple on the surface of the foot or leg, then treat it with what precedes the sewing closed, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	But if it has caused a fracture in the bone and only fragments remain inside, then you should turn the wound over to extract those fragments, if they are separated.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	But if they are not separated, then let them be lanced so that their extraction is eased.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And for other accidental wounds in the other limbs, the treatment is what we have already said.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of wounds to the abdomen:
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The disposition that occurs in the abdomen is either large or small or middling.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	Of the large ones, sometimes there are intestines or nerves in them that must be sewn up and their sutures made more forceful and more delicate.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And a small disruption is made difficult in another way: and you will find that reducing them is more difficult if you do not close off the intrusion of them into their location immediately, for when they are opened up, they are swollen so that it is difficult to put them back inside.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And therefore the best disruption is middling, for in that one the reduction of the intestines is not difficult, and so it is with the two other kinds mentioned before.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And know that the sewing closed of the abdomen is according to four methods; however, two sutures are common that apply also to sutures of the other wounds of the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And two others are specific to abdomen wounds, but they are more proper in sewing closed the abdomen.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And I will recount to you each one with its explanation.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Therefore I say that when the wound is small and some cause of the intestines comes out through it, and its reduction is made difficult in one of two ways: either because of the smallness of the disruption as we have said, or because the intestines are given inflammation by the coldness of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And therefore when that is so, then you should warm it by immersing a sponge or cloth moistened in warm water alone, or you could mix in squill, and cypress, and spikenard, and myrrh with the water and apply it to the intestines until the inflammation is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And sometimes it does this in the wine in which there is stypticity, and it is better for resolving inflammation than just water.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And therefore when you see the inflammation is resolved, then you should moisten the intestines with water in which there are mixed alder and mallow, for by this means the intrusion of it is eased for little cause.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	But if the intestines are not drawn back by this treatment, then you should cut the disruption a little with an instrument by which the ulcers have been cut.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And the first treatment is best when it is not cut and there is no need to dry it out immediately nor any shortage of food.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Of the instrument, know its shape:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	The one part of it is curved and acute, and the other part not acute, and its tip is not blunt but sharp; before, it is obtuse a little.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And therefore when the wound is enlarged and there are intestines coming out of it, then you should have its reduction according to the natural shape of it in its proper location, if that is possible, for that is best.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	But when the disruption is wide and it is in the lower part of the abdomen, then you should have the patient lie on his back with his legs raised higher than his head; and if it is in the upper part, then let him lie on his back with his head and feet higher than his middle parts.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And likewise if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then pay attention and consider always that the part in which there is the wound be higher than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And therefore you should do this with large wounds and middling wounds.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And for small wounds, do what is prepared for you; and indeed the ministering of it should be between your fingers, which hold the wound with its own hand and adjust its edges, and indeed uncover from it to that which will sew it shut, so that any cause for sewing is removed.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	And this is the common way of sewing: you take a needle and thread according to the length of the wound's size; then let go of the end of the disruption with your thumb, and draw in the thread one, so that you do not put the thread through both ends of the wound, by the fingers, within which hold the wound with its own hand; and you have joined together the two ends of the codon by the two ends of the ciphac, and so you have made four stitches.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And now take a strong thread and double it around the needle, and tie some knots at both ends, and then bring the two lips of the wound together with a decent tie; and leave the thickness of the finger, and insert another needle there, and tie that also with thread in the same way as you did with the first needle; and keep doing this if it is necessary with needles until you have completed the whole length of the wound.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And let the needles be neither too large nor too small, for thin needles easily penetrate the flesh; and thick ones are difficult to insert in the wound, and therefore let them be smaller in thickness but larger in length.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And let the needle not be placed at both ends of the wound nearby, so that the flesh is not cut too much and the wound opens before it has healed.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And they must not be prolonged with a stitch so that the wound is not prohibited from healing.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And now insert the ends of the needles so that they do not bother the patient when he sleeps; and place over the stitch powdered herbs spread out on both sides, which will hold the ends of the needles in place; and leave them there until you know that the wound has healed.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	And this method of stitching with needles is most convenient for small wounds, as it only requires one or two needles to be stitched around them.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	But the second stitch is done as follows: you must stitch the four ends, of the wound and two ends of the head in one go, with a needle which has thread wrapped around it, both thin and thick.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And then when you have penetrated all four ends with the needle, return the needle to the point from which you started, so that the thread is pulled back towards the wound, so that the stitch is like a stitch of cloth, and the cloths are tightened.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And leave between each stitch the width of a little finger.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this is the stitch for men.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And with this stitch I healed a wound that a man had received on his belly, and it was a stab wound of more than one palm in length, and the rupture was of half a palm on the right side of the belly, and the disruption was in the middle of the limb; and then I returned him after the intestine had been outside for 24 hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the wound was healed within 15 days or so, and he recovered, and then he left after a few months, and is doing well in his health.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And other doctors had judged that he would not heal; but by miracle he was healed, for I did not cure him with ointment, as it was a place where ointment could not be applied or any medicine put on, but I placed over the wound a cotton pad twice a day and washed it often with honey water until he was healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	But I will tell you of two kinds of stitches proper according to the account of the Word.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And you must start by stitching the wound closed from the outside in.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And therefore as the needle penetrates the wound and into that part from outside to inside, leave the end of the head in the part from which you started; and then let the other end of the head penetrate from the inside out at the other end of the limb.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And when you have done that penetration, then let the other end of the head penetrate another time in that meteyssa extremity of the limb from the outside to the inside; and leave the end of the head that is on this side, and let the needle penetrate at the other end of the limb from the inside out.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And let that penetration by which you are making the head penetrate in the extremity of the limb in which it is, penetrate all the way through.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And then start from this side and stitch that with the end that is of the head on the other side, and withdraw the needle from the wound which it has penetrated, and then return it to that wound and stitch the extremity of the limb that is on the other side with that extremity of the limb; and withdraw that from the wound which it has penetrated.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And do this once and then again, and do this once more so that you sew up all that which is outside according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the sum of this method of stitching is that you sew with a stitch of skin, so that you stitch the head one time from the end of the wound, and leave it in there until you have completed it on the other side.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	But the second proper stitch which I teach is called Gualia's stitch, and it is of a limed kind that is recommended for one who is ill, so you sew it according to similarity in which all parts are joined together conveniently by nature; and the end of one is applied to the end of another, and this is done according to how you see fit.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	Let the needle be placed in the end of the limb from which you start towards the outside, and let it penetrate to the inside in the sole, and leave two ends of the head; and then turn the needle around and let it penetrate from the outside to the inside at two ends of the limb.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	And then turn those around, and let some of them penetrate from the inside to the outside at two ends of the limb on the opposite side.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this method of stitching is better than common stitching, and it is the stitch by which previous memory is recalled.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is Gualia's limed kind.
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And they say also that stomach stitching is straightened with two needles, so you insert in these a thread, and start from where you are towards the other side according to sewing of those whose hearts are joined together equally.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And know that when a rupture is in the middle of the belly, then the stitching of it is more difficult than of other parts of the belly.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	But the game of medicine of wound is judgment of other wounds.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	The cause of which is when you know the wound to be recent with blood before air alters it, and reduce the intestine and stitch it up and dress it decently, then pause over that incarnative powder.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if air has already altered the wound, then pause over that some ointments which are to you within so they make hard stone and draw in the threads, and be stitched up head and limb; and then cure it thus as is the cure of other wounds until it is healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	But if you do not have the medicines, then pause over that at once, for when it begins to discharge pus, wash it well and change that twice a day, as you teach him, until it is healed, for you must not indulge in other medicine in different conditions when wounds are simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	But if you fear that the wound communicates with the principal limbs, then submerge lion wool in oil of tempered quality, or in rosin oil, and pause that over the parts which are between the angles and under the sockets.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if you feel pain or putrefaction in your intestines, when it is many times thus, let it be cauterized with black styptic vinegar, and especially so if the rottenness is from the intestine and has made an exit penetrating into the cavity of it.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And know that the one that is in the large intestine is more difficult to heal than the one in the small intestines.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And it is difficult to heal because the intestine called "gland" does not receive healing from any plague that enters it, and this is due to the great multitude of veins that are in it, and because of its magnitude, and because of the subtlety of its body, and because of its proximity to the nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	But if that which proceeds from the plague is the membrane, and you find it recently affected, reduce it according to your expertise, by which you reduce the intestines equally.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	But if it has passed into space and is already black or green, then you should apply gall to the place where it has turned black, so that blood comes out in a flow, for there are veins and arteries in the membrane.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	Then cut into that which is the other side of the membrane and attach two ends of the gall to the area below where the plague came out, so that on you is lessened the attraction of it due to the cutting of the membrane and emission of the root of the plague.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remembrance of plagues when they occur in the intestine.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When a disruption occurs in the intestine and it is small, then it is possible that it can be restored in some people, for I saw one who had been plagued in his belly by lancing and the plague was of the right side of the stomach, and the plague was ancient and made a fistula, and he was made to drink and belch.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Then I followed the healing of him, and it was believed that he would not be healed, but I continued to sutilize that within which healed and the place is consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And I saw the place already consolidated, so I went upon the patient that he got over the evil in his belly; and no one got sick from that evil accident and he resumed eating and drinking, and also entered into bath and was exercised in his wits.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And some experienced ones already said that when a plague occurs in the intestine and it is small, then it should be bound according to this manner: and it is that you take gum from great pods; and then adjust the two lips of the plague and place one of those gums which have an open mouth over the two lips of the plague; therefore when you put that on and press its mouth, cut off the pod of it, for it adheres and is not dissolved.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And then place another gum near the first one, and do not cease to do this with gums one after another according to the quantity of the whole plague.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	And then reduce it and bind the plague; and let those pods remain attached in the intestine until the intestine is healed; and do not harm the patient.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the intestine be bound with a subtle thread which is made from the intestine of an animal annexed to it, for it is more in needle; and it is that you take the end of these intestinal threads, and it is well stripped, and then bind the end of it with a thread of it, wrapped, and then insert that thread in needles and sew up with it the disruption.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this manner of sewing with gum is not but according to way of confidence and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	But if the plague is great and broad, especially if it is in one of the small intestines, for then there is not but subtilization, and not healing of it altogether.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	Of healing of ulcer and fistula.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	Know that all plague and apostema when it becomes old and turns into an ulcer, and is not consolidated and has a root all the time and is not cut off, then in any member it is, universally it is named fistula, and we call it azucem.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And fistula according to truth is knotted flesh, hard, white with which there is no pain and at which it is hollowed out as it is hollowed out from a tooth; and because of this it is named some nodules, that is pain.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And it is in some people moist, which has a root; and strongly the moisture is cut off in some hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And sometimes this moisture is moved, and it is little, and it is thick, and it is subtle.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And I have already said in the division when I spoke of plagues that all ulcer which is not healed nor naked flesh but one of nine causes: one of which is by lack of blood in the body; or by malice of it; or because between it and the lips there is hard flesh prohibiting birth of flesh; or because it is of moved leges; or because that ulcer within itself is putrid and the matter which is in it is of bad quality; or because the medicine is unsuitable in the healing of it; or when corruption happens in the region, and it is pestilential; or due to property of the region, likewise when it happens in Saragossa, in which there is difficult digestion of diseases, and that healing of apostema is delayed by nature; or because in it there is bone, or moved bones.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	And I have already shown all those causes, and the signs of them, and their healing with medicines in the division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And so that I make you know the healing of fistula which is made by way of operation with hand.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And know that fistula occurs in all parts of the body; for some of them reach the great veins and arteries, or the nerves, or the brain, or the intestine, or the bladder, or one of the ribs, or to any of the vertebrae of the back, or to any of the joints composed by composition as of the hand and the foot; and those are which give proximity to the principal member and their likes.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And so that one of those fistulas which are according to this manner is of diseases of difficult healing, and does not receive curing, and occupation with it is work and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if there is any of the fistulas whose depth does not reach those places which I said, and you hope for and trust in its healing, and you want to come into knowledge of it, then take a probe of iron or steel, and if the fistula goes according to rightness, and you examine that with it.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	But if the fistula is tortuous, then investigate that with a probe of subtle lead, for lead by the lightness of its body is drawn away and curved according to the tortuousness.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula has terrible movements, it is not possible for you to signify about it with probe.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Then christen the hole by its holes, for the moisture by which you christen that comes from the other holes and flows from them.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And then inquire carefully, according to what manner it is possible for you to know if here there are bones or nerves, and it is the hollow of the fistula distant or near, or it is a fistula to which its holes are moved and this over all by the sum of your strength, by your inquiry with hand on the place, and its likes according to the signs and causes accidental to the apostema.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have stood upon all those causes with true state, then go to the healing according to confidence: and it is that you consider then if it is an apparent fistula near or in a place saline, distant from joint, or of nerve, or of artery, or of vein, or one of the places which I said to you and told.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then dry the fistula as mentioned earlier in the narrative, remove anything in that opening and from decayed flesh, and cure what is born of the orifice of the flesh, the skin, and similar, until it is healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	But if the fistula is of great depth and according to right reasoning, then you must insert that into the orifice as far as you can, then cleanse it of all its decayed flesh; and apply hot metals wrapped in sharp medicines, and insert those into the cavity of the fistula which you have grasped with forceps.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And do that a few times until the sharp medicine corrodes all that is rotten in the cavity of the fistula.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	Then restore it with ointments which produce healthy flesh until it is healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	But if it is not healed by that, then cauterize it as we have recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	But if the cause of fistula is bone and you are certain of that, then examine it and dry it according to what we have said, unless you forbid any cause of vein or nerve or main member as we have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is exposed and there is decay and darkness in it, then cut away that decay until all of it is removed; then cure that with what will cause flesh to grow over it until it is healed.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it is not healed and there are still bruises as before, then know that you have not achieved the complete eradication of the decay; then uncover it again and perform the reason for it and the cleansing of it with great care a second time, and restore it.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And so if it is healed, that is good; but if not, then know that the decay is in the great depth of the body which you have not achieved, and so with that you should only let it be.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the decayed bone is small or you are able to pull it out, then pull it out with thin forceps which are suitable for that.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if there are many bones, then perform the extraction of all of them, and of none of them let any cause remain with your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	But if you are hindered by any cause of moisture, and there is no fear or mistake in their insertion, then insert those limbs or flesh if they are here, and free the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	But if you are not prepared to remove the bones from that moment, then place over the wound something which will fester the wound, and leave it so that nothing is around those bones of flesh and limbs, and guard the wound so that it is not consolidated, and the section which you have cut in your operation is constrained.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	Habbants, if you fear, place over it a poultice drenched in oil, or a poultice drenched in Egyptian ointment, or one of the green ointments; for when those flesh poultices puss, and the bones are separated from the incision, and that attraction is alleviated.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	But if it is a large bone like the bone of leg or thigh or similar to those, and what is decayed is only its surface, then cut away that with a razor only behind so that the darkness and decay are removed, and then restore the wound.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	But if what is decayed in it is a large portion, and the decay has already reached the medulla of the bone, then it is a necessary cause to close that and to cut all around where the decay has come, then cure that so that it is consolidated.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I count on you to lean over a man's thigh so that you pause that as example and helper over your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	A young man of about 30 years had pain in his thigh, and from the parts within the jaw it spread to the substance within the body where the substance was pervaded to the jaw, and it was matter of pustule with great pustule, and there was no extrinsic cause to him.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And then the time was prolonged with that due to the error of the doctors until the pustule became open, and many matters came out of it, and its cure was properly paused until the leg became fistulous, and there were in it many orifices which all poured pus and the moistures of the body.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And then he was cured by many doctors for about two years, and there was not found any skill in them but in the art where I was called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And I saw his leg and the matters flowing from it from those orifices to great extent; and indeed that man's body was all emaciated and his colour was yellowish.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then I inserted the tent into one of those orifices and it reached the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	Then I probed all the orifices and found out that they came from all parts of the leg.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then I cut and entered into one of those orifices until I discovered a part of the bone, and found it decayed, and it was already earthy and decayed and blackened; and a part of the leg had been decayed where it had penetrated within the membrane.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then I tied that which was revealed to me and prepared from the exposed bone.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And I saw that it was not in the bone but that decay which I had cut and tied off, and I had already cut away at it.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	Then I paused the restoration of the wound with consolidative medicine for a long time, yet it was not consolidated.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And then I iterated and discovered again on the bone secondarily over the first discovery, and found continued decay in the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And I tied that which appeared to me of that decay, and then I saw it was necessary to perform the cure of it and its restoration, yet it was not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then I discovered on it another time and did not cease to insert the bone little by little particularly and to probe the restoration of it, yet it was not restored until I had cut around a palm of it, and that extracted with its medulla, and then I restored it with medicines, and it was lightly consolidated and healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And it was not necessary to iterate the operation on him and the section on him except for the disposition of his fainting and the weakness of his toleration of death, because he became faint at all hours from the superfluity of evacuation, a bad syncope.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And so he is healed with whole healing, and there is nothing in the place of hard bone; and his disposition is good within his body, and his strength returned to him, and he conversed in his dispositions, and did not make him contrary in walking nor harm in any cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	But if the eminent bone is in place in the body already removed, then you must dry it according to this manner: and take a string and tighten that at the extremity of that eminent bone, and command someone who extends it from there; then pause that string of wool rather thick of the first string; and then lie that on the flesh that is below the bone, and extend the extremity of it so that you draw the flesh to the parts below, and you discover the flesh over the place where you want to cut so that the saw does not cut the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And pause over the bone properly, for when you do that there is not prohibited the saw which does not cut the decayed flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And let the sawing be over the decayed place little by little, for if it is in the cavity of the bone and does not appear in its appearance to feeling, and force it to be sawn again another time.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	If the bone is rotten and not prominent, before it is one piece joined with the other, and the corruption is in a small place or in part of it, then you discover the flesh of all parts; and then pause the fust, and then saw that of the first part where the corruption is, so that it is continuous with the sawing of the other part.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And let the sawing be according to the location of the corruption, a little, according to what we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is in the joint, cut into that corrupted joint and saw the bone where it continues to the other part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not rational but absurd.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the palm of the hand or the foot, it is very difficult; however, one should inquire into the corruption and see how it appears to you, and open it according to each disposition that is possible for you, and with any absurdity be rectified by you when it does not contradict a vein or nerve.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And know that the cutting instruments and saws for cutting these bones are very different according to the situation of the bones, their preparation, thickness, subtlety, magnitude, smallness, hardness, and rarity; therefore, one should prepare every kind of instrument convenient for that operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And know that this operation signifies to you about the kind of instrument for which you are in need; when with you is great study and length and knowledge of the ways of this art, and testimony of ways of illnesses, because then you already have by your physicians that which is convenient to the instruments of all illnesses.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And I have shown to you at the end of this chapter the number of instruments with which you will proceed with simples, with which you will proceed to your prohibition, which you will experience on the others.
Forma de serra:	Shape of saw:
Forma de autra serra:	And the shape of another saw is for operation of the head, so that the point is with two and with three teeth and with four.
Forma de autra serra:	Shape of another saw:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Shape of another large saw:
Forma de ray:	Shape of a razor:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	Let the head of this razor be according to the shape of the head of a starfish, and its points according to the shape of the points of an almond.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And it does not behoove but that with this are rubbed the heads of the joints when they are corrupted, or is a large mouth wide open.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Shape of a larger razor than the others:
Forma de razori menor:	Shape of smaller razors:
Forma de razori lat:	Shape of side razors:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Shape of another saw decently made: let it be made an arc from the most superior part and the acuity of it of steel, and the member of it of boy's dagger decently made.
Forma de lu:	Its shape is:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Shape of a razor in which it has a concavity:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Shape of another subtle razor:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Shape of another razor with a curved extremity:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Shape of a small razor like a tent:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Shape of an incisor with which bones are cut:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Shape of another smaller incisor:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Shape of another incisor; this one is like a saw, and its extremity is like a saw, and it is exhibited in many places in the rationale of bones:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Shape of a saw which is convenient for the rationale of that which is pierced by bones:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And its extremity is triangular and of acute extremity.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	And it is made of steel of India, and similarly, all the causes that we have said of saws and of incisers and of saws.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	Of extreme cutting edges and of the locking of bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The extremities can be pushed or for an intrinsic cause or for an extrinsic cause, or when you have medicated that corruption with treatment of those medicines and the treatment does not confer, or see the corruption go beyond the member which you do not perceive any cause, then one should insert that member into that in which the corruption is, so that the patient escapes through death or evilness, which is a greater defect of the member.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the sign of that to which it happens is that the member is made black as if fire had burned it, or it swells close to the blackness as the burning goes into that member which seizes all the body; and then cut off that.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And similarly, if the cause of the corruption is impact of some poisonous causes like scorpion venom or from a sea-scorpion or from a viper or from similar ones.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or impact is in the extremity of the finger, then you cut off the finger and do not give space to the corruption so that it goes into the hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And similarly, if it happens to the hand, then you cut off that from the joint of the elbow, and do not give space to the corruption so that it goes into the elbow joint of the arm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if you do not want to, then cut off the arm in the junction of the shoulder.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if the corruption passes on and turns around the shoulder, then in that is the death of the patient; and to add another cause besides this for treatment is a quantity of vertue.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And similarly, if corruption happens on the foot, then you cut off that into one of the toes.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if it seizes in the sole of the foot, then you cut off all the foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	But if it goes into the toe, then you cut off the toe at the junction of the toe.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if the corruption is already come upon the toe, then in it there is not remedy but dismissal, and let the patient go to death.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	And the way of cutting off the member or of sawing it is that you press the ligament in the part most below where you want to cut off, and press another ligament on top of the place; and extend the minister one ligament to the parts below, and extend the other minister over it; and you separate the flesh which is between two ligaments, then let it be cut off or sawed.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And one should be stopped with a ligature of the vessels on all sides so that it does not touch the place, and that it comes to the patient injured constricted and suppurating and cauterized.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	But if blood flows from the wound, then you should cauterize the site, or place some powder on it that restricts the flow of blood; and then return to your treatment until it is complete.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then bind the affected limb with a bandage in a suitable way, and treat it until it is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And I remember to you that one man had a blackness on his foot, this incident that I and you recounted, which happened to him by burning that was like fire.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And this corruption first occurred in his toe, extending throughout the foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that man prepared some remedies for himself as the treatment went to the limb with the strength of it, and he was overcome by pain and burning, and he applied that foot up to the joint, and it healed.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	For a long time, that man had that corruptive condition in his finger on his hand.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then he came to me, and so I punctured that surplus with what I put on his hand of the medicines, and then purified his body; and the surplus was not absorbed but began to go to another finger as it started in the hand.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And he asked me to cut his hand, and I did not want to do that hoping for the absorption of that surplus, but fearing death from the cutting of the hand, for the power of the illness was towards destruction.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And since he despaired from me, he returned to his land and reached me that this man prepared and cut off his entire hand, and he healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I have not added this account except that it may be an aid about what happens from this illness, and that it is a sign by which it is known and according to which it operates.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	About the treatment of hemorrhoids and the quality of the enema with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When an abscess occurs in some fleshy parts and the space of the abscess is prolonged as it collects pus, and then it is broken and punctured, and the pus is discharged from it, and it remains empty like a vessel, and the codicle that is on top of it dries up with a thin membrane, and there has not been reached to a deeper corruption, nor has it impressed on bone or nerve or ligament, it is called sinus, and is not named fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	But if the space is prolonged as corruption impregnates in some part, then it is called a fistula and not sinus.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And its treatment is that you cut off the entire codicle as it is rolled up, and especially when it is thin and done with a cloth, and cauterize so that it does not adhere to the place by its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	But if you expect the codicle to adhere and that corruption has not reached its consequences, and in the codicle there is space, then you treat it with an enema.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And it is considered as a sinus, and if it is large, and the breath that comes from it is fetid, then enema that with an Egyptian medicine which is of oil and sour wine and thinnest honey received in parts, and are put into a vessel, and are cut over the fire until the medicine becomes hot and reaches the consistency of honey.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And then you take from it what is necessary and dissolve it with water and honey; and enema that sinus with that, and plug the opening of it, and let the medicine stay in there for the quantity of two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And then pull that out with caution; and do that for so many days until the sinus is purified and the shame is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And sometimes it is enema with ash water when you do not have that medicine; and take ashes from a vine, and put on it water; and then pour that and enema that sinus with it until you are convinced that the sinus has stopped.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the patient has no tolerance for the Egyptian medicine or ash water, then enema that with water and honey mixed with thin thinnest honey, and enema that sinus with wine and honey mixed, because of the property of honey is that it purifies and washes, and the wine makes the sinus adhere, and especially when in the wine there is surplus of astringency and dryness.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you do that several times and you are convinced that the sinus has healed, then enema that with what makes the flesh in it grow.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And take some thin dye and dissolve that with roasted oil and astringent wine, or enema that with some medicines and other dyes that I have written in the treatment of dyes.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the opening of the sinus is narrow that the cannula of the enema is not received, then you enlarge it with a small iron little by little, and put in there calcium wrapped in Egyptian ointment or in basilikon ointment until it is enlarged.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And similarly if the opening is large, then you gather its lips with a suture and take off from it the quantity in which between the enemas there is an addition.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the opening of it from which the breath runs is elevated to its parts above, then dry that in the hollow place from which the breath runs in so that the flesh engendered in there is dried, for when the breath is constricted in the depth of the sinus the flesh is engendered in there.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it is not possible for you to dry the sinus within the bone pus base according to how you want, then it is forced that you prepare the limb with a preparation by which the breath runs softly according to what appears to you and that there is not retained in there any cause of the breath.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And take consolidating medicines which are put on the sinus conveniently according to what you want extending those over thin linen.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And the linen is of such great quantity as it makes the communication of the whole sinus; and then insert that with forceps in the right side of the opening of the sinus a little more ample than the opening of the sinus, and then extend over another linen of the dyes lions according to the quantity of the cut, and put those over it for position distant from the opening of the sinus so that the discharge of the breath is not closed on it and not press the linen greatly except after some days once a day.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	But that which is over the opening of the sinus, which heals in a whole hour because it dries that which is closed in there of the breath.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And so that you know if that which runs from it is motion or a little, or is digested or not digested.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And with that consider the place of that sinus if in it the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess in it.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And when your treatment is prolonged in that manner and you see the matter which is shed over the opening of the sinus already adheres or the adhesion is increased, then loosen it on the third day, and when you loosen the bandage change the ointment.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	But if a subtle pus flows from the sinus, then do not despair of its adhesion because it heals, for some people in which there is late generation of flesh in their wounds and others in which is done the contrary of that.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if the breath is not digested after several days from the sinus do not know that it does not adhere; and if the adhesion of the sinus is delayed and is prolonged cause, then adjust it in desiccation of the medicines, and if the medicines are moist in their substance and in their strength are dry like a thin dye when the surplus of addition of zegi is adjusted in it.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the last part of the body that is cured is where you should apply a thin ointment dissolved in rose oil, and on top of it apply old wine equal to its substance, and then comfort him with that and use it.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And in that action, when there is no strength, use a thin ointment, honey when it is cut and made thick, and use it; or take myrrh and aloe and incense, and mix them all together and pulverize them over the fire, and then line it on a cloth and place it over the navel; and line the honey that you have cut and made thick with it, and pulverize it over the cloth.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And sometimes you should give him a long and thin aristology of celestial lily (which is the celestial lily) and farina of err and centaurea, and use those simples or adjust them, crush them and sift them over the honey that I have mentioned; and use it.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the navel is prolonged and not healed by this treatment, then you will know that the corruption is in his bowels, and he does an inquiry into the bones or other hard members or to the tissues; then you should treat it with a fistular cure as mentioned above.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	Of treatment of paronychia and nail abrasion and digit addition and section.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Panaritis is an abscess that develops under the nail of the finger of the hand or foot, and it rarely affects other fingers, and when it is prolonged and its treatment is neglected, there is an abscess of pus, or it becomes corrupt and erode the matrix of the nail, and it strongly affects the entire nail, and the corruption strongly penetrates into the bone within which it has a fetid odor, and the end of the finger becomes rotten, and its color turns brown.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And if you have that which we mentioned in the division and do not find relief from your treatment, then know that you must cut away all the excess that has accumulated under the nail, and then cauterize the wound with hot iron, for cautery is beneficial in such cases.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is intact and the nail is healthy, and the edges of the nail are pushing against each other and starting to pierce it, then you should apply a thin thread under the nail's edge that is piercing the flesh, and lift it up and insert that flesh with ease, and place on top of it something caustic that has been dissolved within until everything is cauterized; and then treat it with an ointment until it is healed.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	But if the corruption has already penetrated into the bone, then you must cut out that bone and extract it, for it will not be healed as long as the corrupt bone remains within it.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the rottenness and corruption have gone into the finger, then you should cut it off at one of its joints according to where it is affected most, and then treat it until it is healed.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	But if there is a blow or abrasion to the nail, and because of that there is severe pain, then you should at the beginning let the patient's blood flow, and then cut off the nail with a sharp spatulum with a transverse incision above it, and be careful not to let the incision penetrate into the flesh below the nail, for you will cause great pain to the patient, and also cause an excess of flesh to grow in that place; and then treat that place until the pain subsides.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	But a finger that is born to some men is very fleshy, and in it there are few bones, or its nail is very thin.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And some of them are born at the root of a joint, or their origin is from some joints of the fingers.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	But that which is born at some joints of the finger is not painful, and that which is born at the joints is usually very painful.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And of those that are born fleshy, their section is easier, and you should cut it off at its root with a broad spatula.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	But of that which is born at the root of a joint, its treatment is difficult; and therefore be careful about its incision.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But in that which is born at the joints of the finger, you should cut off at the beginning the flesh of it with a round incision into the bone, and then saw with one of those convenient saws for it, and then treat it until it is healed.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	But consolidation which happens to the fingers many times, or because of the nature of the person who is born that way, or because of consolidation of a wound, or because of burning with fire, or because of similar things; therefore you should dry up that consolidation until the fingers return to their natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And then place between them cloths dipped in rose oil so that they are not consolidated too quickly, and separate those fingers or place a thin lead plate between them until they are consolidated as desired.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And similarly if consolidation happens in some fingers with the palm, then you should dry up that consolidation according to its preparation and convenience to the figure of the member.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	Of cuts from injuries, these are varicose veins.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Varicose veins are caused by varicose veins, and they are thick wrapped veins full of melancholic humors that come in the members of the body, and their greatest occurrence is in the feet, and especially in the feet of travellers, laborers, and carriers.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Therefore you should administer a purgation of the body from black bile several times with strong expulsion, and then let the patient bleed from the basilic vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	But their treatment by iron is according to two methods: one is that it is cut and the black blood is drawn out, and the other method is that the vein is elevated and all of it is extracted.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	Its section is according to this method: at the beginning soak the foot in warm water until the gross blood is dissolved, which is feculent from the foot, and then tighten the foot of the patient at the part above the pus-filled sore of the leg with a bandage, and then dry up the vein in one, or two, or three places with a broad incision, and then elevate the black blood with the palm of the hand from the part below the foot until you have extracted as much as you wish, and as much as the strength of the patient can bear.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And then bind that up, and order him to abstain from black bile-generating foods.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And repeat the treatment by bloodletting whenever the veins are full, and notice the patient's condition.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	But their elevation is according to this method: you warm the foot of the patient, if it is swollen with petechiae, and then place him in a bath and soak his foot in warm water until it becomes relaxed and the veins are dilated; or he must exercise himself strongly, if there is no bath available, until the member is warmed.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And then dry up the vein in the right side of the leg by incision in the thigh or in the back of it above the ankle, or in the base of the foot.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And then open the vein with nails and scratch the vein in every part where it appears to the sense, and it is required that you notice if that turns dark.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And therefore when you open and scratch the vein, you will see that it is white underneath.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And then you place under that a thread so that it is elevated and bled from the vein, and stop that with lion's tooth.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	And then cut another section, approximately three digits in size, and then strip away the skin of the area above the vein where it appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	And then elevate that section and incision it in the back, and then extract that section and elevate it where it is exited by the second section, and then extract it from above the section.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And do that as you extract it from the highest section or highest of all sections, where it is exited; and then incision it there.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if you don't see it to extract and elevate, then insert a strong curved needle with a thread through that section, and ligature it and extract it, or insert under there the needle and turn your hand around everywhere where it is stuck.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And be careful that it is not cut; for if it is broken, it will be difficult to elevate that part and it has come over the patient through that wound.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when you have completely extracted it, then place on the site of the plague wool soaked in wine and rose oil, and cure that part as it is healed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the vein is contracted with torsion and there is no straightness as we have said, then you must split that part of the torsion and suspension of it, and elevate it with pincers as much as you can.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And be careful that you don't incision the vein and plague it, for it will be difficult to elevate it; use your judgement in that matter.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	The form of incision with which the vein is dried:
Forma de unci orp:	Form of pincers:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not acute with pincers nor has an acute extremity so that it doesn't plague the vein; and it is of great flexibility like a lion, for if it was subtle, it would incision the vein by its subtlety; it has superficial thickness in it as we have said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	On extraction of the vein of the leg.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is generated in the legs in southern lands like Al-Ategi in the land of Arabs and in the southern and arid lands of little tenderness and in which there is no grass nor openings.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And very rarely it is generated in other parts of the body other than the legs.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And its gestation is of putrefaction that comes from below the vein like poison within the body of serpents and worms and snails and worms generating between the vein and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	And the sign of the advent of it is of this vein that happens in the leg a vehement inflammation; and then the site is blistered; and then the vein exits the site of that blister which resembles the root of a plant.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And when the end appears, then you should wrap around it a piece of lead weighing as much as a drachma, and tie that and leave the lead hanging from the leg.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And as many times as you see some cause to the parts deflating, wrap that in lead and hold it.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if the part is prolonged, then you incision a part of it and wrap the remainder; and don't incision that which is exited as it is exited, for if you incision it, it will contract and enter into the flesh and cause an abscess and pus in the site and a bad ulcer.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	So that it is drawn out smoothly and is extracted little by little as it is exited from the end of it and does not wind back in the body for any cause.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And from this vein it exits in some men who are in its length of five palms and ten, and I have seen one that exits twenty palms.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is incised in the hour of its medicine, then insert the needle into its hollow and pierce it with a long hole through the body so that it evacuates everything that is in the matter, and administer putrefaction of the site for several days with medicines; and then cure that for the cure of abscesses.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein sometimes has branchy motions, and mostly when it appears at the junction of the leg or in the leg, and to it come motionless orifices, and it exits from each orifice a ram.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And then cure that as we have said in division and with what is above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	On the generation of worms under the skin and it is called bovine disease.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This disease is named in some land because of the cow's disease since it sometimes affects oxen and there is a worm which is born between the vein and the flesh, and goes throughout the body pushing and penetrating, and is shown by its movement from part to part as it ruptures the vein and exits out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And its generation is through putrefaction of some humors like worms and serpents and earthworms and tapeworms in the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is feared for its malice, for when it goes in the body and is elevated to the head, and it has reached the brain, then it pierces in it and destroys the brain, and from there it sometimes moves around.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And therefore when you want to cure it and extract it, then it is not done unless through its movement and appearance, and then you must draw what is above it and what is below it with ligation and strong constriction, and then incision it and extract that.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is buried in the flesh and you don't touch it, then you place cautery with fire on the site where it dwells, and the greatest cause that is feared is corruption of it as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	And if you see it pervening to the head near the brain, then draw on the forehead with a strong constriction, and then incision it and extract that; and let the patient use purification of his body with evacuant medicines, and guard against food generating putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	On the generation of disease in children.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This disease is named in our land as children, and it is a pain that comes to some parts, and then it is transferred from part to part.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And you have already seen that according to what you will tell me.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	He was called to a woman patient in a village, and he discovered her arm and saw a small inflammation in the vein of the arm, and when it was rubbed for an hour, that inflammation rose like silver when it moved from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then it went to the pain of that site and became stuck in the muscle, and then it stayed there for an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And then it went to the other body as it pervened to the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And then he showed me that it was revolving through all his body as I saw; and there was great marvel at its change of speed from part to part.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I had already seen that before in my own eyes according to that manner, but I have seen motions that transfer the pain from part to part.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	But I did not see that in arms as in the woman.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I did not think that it was that because the woman was old, of frail body and veins uncovered, and in her appeared that movement changed.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that it does not appear according to this retro-cure in those who are delicate and with bodies of veins pressed together.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And when you want to treat the patient and he feels that pain, then it is not for you to appear in front of him as we have said, then you strengthen him on that and gently press him there where that windiness is blocked, and cauterize the spot.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	But if you do not see it with your own eyes, then cure him by evacuating the body and expelling windiness, and treat those ulcers with stinking pills, and pills of serapium, and similar things.
De extraccio de sagetas.	On the extraction of arrows:
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrows are diverse according to their species and according to the parts of the body they affect: for their diversity is that some have large points, and small, and concave, and blunt, and solid; and among them there are those with three angles, and those with tongues, and those which are stars.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And those which affect the limbs and the feet depend on two types: for the limbs are either major causes, such as the brain, heart, liver, lung, intestines, bladder, and their likes; and thus when pain strikes one of these limbs and you experience symptoms of death, which I will recount later, then you must avoid extracting that arrow from those in whom the signs of death are most prominent, and when you do not observe these signs of death, and the arrow is not deeply lodged in the limb, then extract it and treat the wound.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And the signs of the soul are when an arrow strikes it, and pierces the bone, and exits through the hole which is above the brain, for then there occurs violent vomiting, and scotomata, and vertigo, and burning in the eyes, and inflammation and burning of the tongue, and spasms and confusion of the mind and vomiting of bile, and the voice becomes very hoarse and destroyed, and there is a discharge of white moisture from the wound site, and his eyes look like water.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And so if you observe these signs, then refrain from treating the wound and extracting the arrow unless it has exited.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	But the signs of the arrow when it strikes the heart are that it is near the left nipple, and feels as though it were lodged in a hard substance, and is not a soft cause; and the movement of the arrow is very similar to the movement of the pulse, and black blood flows from the wound, and there is chilliness of the extremities, and sweat, and fainting; and so know that death descends quickly.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And the signs when the arrow has wounded the lung are sputum of bloody foam from the wound, and the vessels near the neck are swollen, and the color of the patient changes, and he exhales a great spirit with breath, and asks for fresh air to breathe.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the arrow strikes the diaphragm which is in the chest, then the pain is near the small ribs, and there is made a great wound with violent pain and with sighing, and not all of the limbs of the muscles are paralyzed.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if the arrow strikes the stomach, then quickly see in the wound some undigested food.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if the arrow strikes the abdomen and is lodged in it, see some rent in the wound, or the membrane, or intestine which is torn, and there is no hope for a cure of him through extracting the arrow.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the arrow strikes the bladder and urine exits from it, and some cause processes outward from there to the parts outside, and there is great pain upon the patient, then know that it is mortal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	But the other limbs such as the face, neck, jaw, shoulders, back, ribs, breastbone, thigh, and their likes of the limbs are saved according to the most prominent dispositions when the arrow does not strike a vein or artery and is not a venomous arrow.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I will recount to you what I have seen of the nature of these arrows so that you may know about your treatment.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The cause is that in a man who had an arrow stuck in the tear duct of his eye, when I extracted it from him through the other side of his nostril, and removed the grays of his eyebrow, he was healed and no harm befell him.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And I extracted another arrow from a Jew which had struck him in the grays of his eye, below the eyelid, and the arrow was already concealed and he did not manage to get it except for a small tip with which it adhered to his staff, and it was a great arrow of the sharp arrows of the Turks, with a lion ferrule on which there were no eyebrows.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And the Jew was healed, and no harm befell his eye.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And I extracted another arrow from a Christian which had struck him in the jaw, and it was an Arabic arrow, and it was that to which there were eyebrows; and then I inserted it between two fingers, and it was already submerged in his jaw; and then I made it smaller with that, and then extracted it, and the Christian was healed.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And I extracted another arrow from a man which had struck him in the belly, and I thought he would die from it; and so when thirty days had passed and there was not changed upon him any cause of his dispositions, I inserted into the arrow and moved it about, and he was healed and no harm befell him.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And I saw a man in whom an arrow had struck the back of his thigh and the wound had healed over him, and after close to seven years, the arrow exited through the root of his thigh.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And I saw a woman in whom an arrow had struck her belly and the wound had healed over her, and she was not changed in her dispositions, and the woman did not suffer harm in any of her natural functions.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And I saw another man in whom an arrow had struck his face and the wound had healed over him, and the arrow was broken but he did not feel any pain, and similar signs occurred with these.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And I extracted the arrow of the prince of the king's son who had struck him in the bridge of his nose and it had exited through the right side, and the entire arrow was concealed.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And I was called to treat him when the arrow had entered three days prior.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then I found the wound of the arrow tight, and then I probed it with a subtle probe, and he did not feel that; but he felt a sting below his right eyebrow, and then I sensed that the sting was from the tip of the arrow.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And I applied the spot with ointment in which there is an atractive and digestive virtue, confident that the spot would appear to me as the location of the arrow, so that it exits over it.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And there did not occur in the spot any significant accident that the arrow had struck that spot; and I continued with the ointment over him for several days, and no accident occurred; and the wound healed up in between, and he recovered from the extraction of him after a space of several days until one day he felt the arrow within his nose and showed it to me.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then I applied to the wound sharp and corrosive medicine for several days until pus opened, and with a probe I probed that, and found the tip of the arrow which adhered to the staff.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And then I applied in the perception of the wound with that sharp medicine until it appeared to me visibly the tip of the arrow, and passed over time with that for the space of four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And when the wound has become very inflamed, and it is possible for me to insert forceps into it, and I have cleaned it out, and there is no obstruction preventing its extraction, then I do not cease to manipulate it with clever techniques until, on a particular day, I extract it with specially made forceps, as will be described in the final section of this chapter; and I then repair that wound.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And some doctors believe that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored, but I have restored it and consolidated the wound; and the patient was completely healed and suffered no ill effects.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I will now describe the quality of the extraction of certain arrows so that you may understand the rule and significance of what I have not described, for the parts of this art and the definitions of those terms are not covered in this book.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the skilled surgeon compares a few things about motion, and what is present to what is absent; and he discovers new operations and new instruments through the descent of foreign causes into the art when they occur.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And so I say that arrows are not extracted from the members in which they are lodged, except according to two methods: either by attraction of the place where they enter, or by the opposite of the other part.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is lodged in a fleshy place and is drawn out and extracted is an arrow.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if it does not obey the extraction in the hour in which it is cut, then you must leave it for a few days until the flesh around it has healed and the attraction and exit of the arrow have been alleviated.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	And similarly, if it is lodged in bone and does not obey your extraction, then leave it for a few days and repeat the attraction and motion of it every day until it is extracted.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if it does not obey your extraction for several days, then you must pierce the circumference of the arrow in that bone with a very fine instrument until the space around the arrow is enlarged and you can then extract it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the arrow is lodged in the bone of the head and has already reached one of the ventricles of the brain, and the patient exhibits some of those symptoms which I have mentioned, then abstain from extracting the arrow and leave it for several days until its nature is equilibrated; for if the arrow penetrates to the brain, death will not be prolonged.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrow is lodged only in the core of the bone and does not penetrate into the brain, and the patient remains for several days without experiencing any of those symptoms, then you must manipulate both the attraction of the arrow and the attraction of the patient himself.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	But if it is lodged in the bone and does not obey your extraction, then you must apply instruments to the circumference of the arrow as we have recommended, and then heal the area around it.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	But if the arrow is lodged deeply in the body and is hidden from sight, then you must probe it with a probe, and if you feel it, then draw it out with some instruments suitable for attracting it.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot reach it because of the constriction of the wound and because of the length of the weapon, and there is no bone or nerve or vein in the way, then pierce the wound until it is enlarged and the arrow can be extracted.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if there are nails holding it in place, then you must loosen the flesh in which it is lodged completely all around with whatever skill you can; and manipulate it until you can free the flesh from the fracture of the nails and their twisting until it obeys.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in whatever place it is, then use with twisting of your hand and forceps on all sides until it obeys; and manipulate with great subtlety so that the arrow is not broken and so that its extraction is not made difficult for you.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot extract it in one day, then leave it for a few days until the parts around it have healed, and then repeat the process when it has been alleviated.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	But if you experience contrary bleeding, then administer what we have said about healing in its chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And guard your skill from cutting into a vein or nerve, or tendon, and manipulate it in every way possible to extract the arrow; and do this with ease and tranquility, and slowness and firmness, just as I have recommended to you and as you have recommended to yourself.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And therefore you should contract the arrow so that the patient is in accordance with the figure according to which the position of the arrow is in him, for it is more beneficial.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	But if this is not possible for you, then you must administer what is possible for you according to the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	But the arrows which are extracted by the opposite of the other part, or which have already entered into some part from outside, or cause hollowness in the extremity of the arrow due to sensitivity of the part above the joint nearest it, then you cut it; and the section should be according to the amount by which the forceps grasp it; and then draw it out, for it is made easier to extract.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	But if it is retained in the bone, then you twist with contrary motion until the arrow is impressed into the bone, and widen the hole by yourself, and then extract it.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	And if not, leave it for a few days and then repeat the process until it is extracted.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the shaft of the arrow is in that, then you push it out with him.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	But if the shaft is broken and you want to administer impact, then you insert it into the arrow so that its concave part enters the concavity of the arrow and then push it out with him.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	But if the arrow is concave, then you push it out with a strong instrument inserted into it, for the arrow is alleviated by that.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the arrow is poisoned, then you must hollow out all the flesh in which the venom is, if it is possible for you to do so, and then heal that with whatever is appropriate.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the arrow hits in the foot, or in the belly, or in the bladder, or in the side, and is near enough for you to touch it with your probe, and it is possible for you to cut it, then cut it and guard against cutting into a vein or nerve; and extract that, and then sew up the wound if it bleeds, and heal that until it is healed.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Form of forceps with which arrows are drawn out:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	Their ends should be like the beak of an owl that they grip the arrow so that it does not let go.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And they should be made in different shapes, large and small, according to the amount of the size of the arrow and its weakness, and according to the width of the wound and its constriction.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	Form of hollow impact made with this concave end like an owl's beak so that the instrument of the arrow is alleviated in it and a push of that which is hidden:
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Form of impact of a hidden end:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	like this with a twist so that the instrument of it is alleviated in the concave arrow and is pushed by that.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	Of puncturing the veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so .xxx., de las quals so en le cap .xvi., so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins of fleubotomy, from which blood usually flows. of which there are in the head .xvi., there are two pulsating veins which are near the ears, some say; two herbs that appear on both temples; and two veins that are in two lacrimal of two hulls that are called aspicientz; and the vein prepared in the middle part of the forehead, and the vein that is at the end of the nose; and two guidegi that are on the neck; and two veins that are above the lip; and two veins that are below the lip; and — these are the veins that are called algelic —; and there are two veins that are below the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so .v.; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	But the veins that are bled in the arms are .v.; four of those are cephalic, and is due to the wild side; and the people call  “the vein of the head”, and is deaf, and is a middle vein, and is composed of one branch of the basilica, and of another ram of the cephalica; and they name that one the people  “vein of all the body”, and basilica is the vein which is paused on the domestic side, and is named  “citillar”, and they call that one the common people  “vein of the belly”; and funis of the arm, and is paused over the focil, and is that one in which it is bled, and is that one that appears above the poutz by manifest appearance; and salvatella, and is the vein that is between the said auricular and the smallest said, and are in him two ramps.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And in the foot and the leg are three veins; one of those is that which is below the curvature of the jaw of the wild side; and the second is sophena, and its place is below the leg of the domestic side; and the sciatic vein, and its place is below the leg of the wild side; and in the leg are other veins similar to those.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The juice of the veins that are near the ears is to ancient cataracts and emigrant and ulcerations of the head bad ancient.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of bleeding those is according to what you account to you: it is that is shaved the head of the patient, and is rubbed the head of the patient in the occipital in the place of both veins with a drape ample with good friction; tighten the patient his neck with a bandage between which appear the two and their places are near the ears in two places deposed of the head; and seek that one with your finger, and if you feel the pulse of those with your finger, here is sign with attempt.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Take you the lance cutellar, and it is that which is incident, and take you that one below the vein in the codena between which the bleeding came to the bone.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And take up your hand with the vein and the codena to the parts above and insert the vein with incident incision.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And let the length of the incision the quantity of two fingers adjusted or around that; and make to exit the blood as much as you want.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And tighten with powder and layssa that one between which is healed.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And he has preceded in the beginning of the book the incision of those and their cauterization.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	But of the two veins arteries that are in the temples the juice of the phlebotomy is to ancient emigration and wickedness and obstinate ophthalmia and body of acute superfluities poured out in the hulls.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of bleeding those is according to what you account to you: constrict the patient his neck motion between which appear the two veins to the feeling by manifest appearance and let be demonstrated the pulse of them below your finger; and then you sign with attempt.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And take you up the codena above the vein to the parts above with your finger indic, and insert the bleeding incident below, and elevate the vein above; and insert that one as well as you have done in the two other veins; and make to exit the blood according to the quantity of your necessity.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And take off the constriction of the patient, and pause your finger on the vein for one hour, and then pause on that one cloth and powder and tighten that one above with strong constriction, and layssa that one between which is healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And he has preceded the recollection of them, and of those the incision, and the attraction in the beginning of the book.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And then the juice of phlebotomy of the vein of the forehead is proper the phlebotomy of the cephalic to the ancient maladies of the face and to emigration and heat and ulcerations suppurative.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of phlebotomy of him is according to what you account to you; it is that the patient tightens his neck with a bandage between which appears the vein; and take you the instrument which is named fossori, of which this is the form:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Pause the point eminent which is at the head of the fossori on that vein and peck it in him with a needle or with another cause in the manner of lu, and let exit the blood according to the quantity that you want; and then take off the perforation of the patient and tighten that one between which is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	And some times it is opened with phlebotomy lat, however not believe that the phlebotomy is of acute extremity as well as the other phlebotomies, before it is of lateral extremity, and phlebotomize that one according to the transverse, because the bone is near and strong he would break in him the phlebotomy when it is subtle.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	But the juice of the two veins that are in the lacrimal of two hulls for scabies of the hulls for heat and weeping in the hulls, and to the maladies of the face.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	And the quality of phlebotomy is that the patient tightens his neck with a bandage, and take you those, and you be standing over the head of him.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And let the phlebotomy be done according to the transverse to length a little with phlebotomies few, because in the place there is no meat; and if the phlebotomy is subtle, strong its extremity is broken.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And take you exit of the blood as much as it is necessary to you, and pause on those cloth, and tighten those one night, and then take off those.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	But the phlebotomy of the vein of the nose is conferred to acute fever and to violent heat, and to the maladies of the face and emigration and heat that happens in the face, and especially when it is ancient.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of phlebotomy of him is that the patient tightens his neck and take you his nose with your left hand, and take you the phlebotomy subtle long and insert that one in the middle place of the head of the nose according to rectitude, because the vein does not appear to the feeling here, and because the blood begins to flow at once.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	Believe that you finish your hand with the phlebotomy little by little and make to exit of the blood according to your necessity; and then tie that one for a night, because that one is restored more easily.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	But the juice of phlebotomy of the two guideg is to constriction of ale and to commencement of leprosy and to many maladies and inpetige and bad suppurative ulcers as well as herpotromeno.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And the quality of phlebotomy of those is that the patient constricts each one in his neck with ligament; and set the artifexs over the head of the patient, and let the patient be seated on a chair.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	And take you phlebotomize the vein to length with phlebotomy ample little by little; and then exit of blood according to tempered quantity or according to that which sees of necessity that is in that; and then do likewise on the other vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	Then release the ligament and tighten the two veins with a ligature to prevent the patient from being suffocated, and allow them to breathe until the wound is healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	And the benefit of phlebotomy in the veins, it will treat small sores and pustules in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and bad ulcers and fissures, and bad ulcers that are in the nose and around his head.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	And the quality of phlebotomy of those is that you make the patient lie down before you, and tighten his neck with a bandage, and lift up his lips and watch out for two veins, from which the one is on the right side of the lip and the second is on the left; and their demonstration is by the blackness of each of both of them, and this more so because in the circuit of these there are small black veins; and then cut each through cutting.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	But if doubt exists under you, and you do not know which is of those, then you understand to incision of the largest of those, and of the most manifest of them.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And make the illusion of the two veins that are in the lips above.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	But habit usually inclines more to incising the two veins that are in the lip below.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	But of two veins that are below the tongue, the benefit is properly phlebotomy of the cephalica to suffocations that are in the throat, to diseases of the uvula, and to diseases of the mouth.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And the quality of phlebotomizing those is that you follow the patient between your fingers in front of the sun, and raise his tongue, and watch below the tongue, from one side of him vein and the other side vein, and the color of each is declining to blackness.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And then phlebotomize each; and beware that you do not finish your hand in phlebotomizing those, for below those are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the veins that are phlebotomized in the head are those in which blood usually flows in all men, and the phlebotomy of them is done according to two manners, or they put in leech mirtilat or olive oil declining in subtlety; or they cut with a fleubotomy blade, and it appeals if without smell, and this is its form:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this without-smell is that you convoke to a section and of those are specific parts and subtle according to the amplitude of the veins and according to the tightness of them.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Form of leech mirtilat:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	Be the side of him thus with vehemence, and it is fitting to open the concave veins full proceeding apparent thick, and to those that contain thick blood tortured.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	And this is the form of olive oil phlebotomy:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And this phlebotomy is of lesser width and of more subtle extremity, and it is fitting to phlebotomy of subtle veins that contain subtle blood citrusy.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	But the benefit of phlebotomy of the basilic vein which is one of three veins: for when you extract blood from diseases that are below the throat and neck, and that affect the feet and belly.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And it is fitting to the phlebotomist, when phlebotomizing that, that he guards well and is above-fear in that, for below him there is an artery, and if he errs and hits in the puncturing of the phlebotomy, cut into that artery and let flow blood, so that he not phlebotomize that with pungent phlebotomies, unless it be cutting with without-smell.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the basilic does not appear by apparent manifestation, then you must leave that and change to the other, or seek some branch of it; or phlebotomy in the end of the arm, for that is manifest; and cut into it with without-smell phlebotomy just as we have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	But if you want the phlebotomy of it meteyssa, then you must hit before the tightness of the arm that touch the place between which you know the location of the pulse, and then press upon him with your palm; and lift the arm and cut into the vein with concave section with without-smell phlebotomy just as we have said; and beware that you do not hit the place by some space from the location of the artery.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	And when you feel, as you tighten the ligament, swelling in the place that you have pressed with your palm, then that swelling is swelling of the artery, and therefore avoid it.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if you see the blood flow in the phlebotomy as with brightness of an infant, and the blood is subtle red, then know that it is of artery blood; and then you pinch and pause your finger over that for long space; and then push your finger, and if the blood is cut off, how many times it is cut off, then you tighten the arm and leave that.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And watch over the patient of the youth of him, and be above-fear of him and not abuse him for some days until he is healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	But if the blood is not cut off, and you see that you do not have medicine at hand, then you cut into the artery, if it appears to you; for the extremity of him is contracted, and the blood is cut off; or take a knife of fistic, and open that, and take one half and tighten that over the place of the vein with tightness descending with ligament and with powder within another day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And then if the blood is cut off, well it is; and if not, then heal that with that from which it came to the memory of the place of the powders cut off flow of blood.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And the cutting off of his blood is difficult in many dispositions by the small place of the wound and the possibility of the tightness of the arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	But of the dark vein the phlebotomy is benefit that extracts blood from the superior part of the head and from the inferior part of the body; for it is composed of branch of the basilic and of the cephalica, just as we have said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And beware for the phlebotomist that he be above-fear in the phlebotomy of him, for below it is a nerve; and then if he hits in the puncturing of the phlebotomy and strikes the nerve, stupor will occur to him, and difficult healing of him, and often not healed at all, and this nerve many times appears to feeling; and if it is hidden in some men and is subtle and not manifested, then you must pause the phlebotomy with that by which you phlebotomize with section of without-smell, and avoid the nerve with your strength.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if the vein is between two nerves, then cut into the vein in its length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The benefit of phlebotomy of the cephalica vein is that it attracts blood from the head and treats diseases of the ears.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And beware in this properly, if you want that you phlebotomize with leech mirtilat or olive oil; for it is the safest of all veins, for there is not below it artery nor nerve.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	But however it is fitting that you phlebotomy guard that by the phlebotomy do not puncture the head of the lizard so only, and seek the place more distant, and not hit him, if he is not struck by the first impact that be upon him by phlebotomy some times.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	But however it is placed in some men, when it is not phlebotomized in the first impact, but do not note in return to that apostema.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	But the quality of phlebotomy of that and its accidents are many, in which you must think in their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first of them is that one must know that phlebotomy is not administered except for the preservation of health and for the hope of life and the prevention of diseases, and that phlebotomy be performed on one of the veins that are in the head, namely: cephalica, fusca, and basilica; and that phlebotomy be performed at the beginning of spring, after breakfast in spring and autumn, and in winter near the time of eating, when there are signs of fullness.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And phlebotomy should be performed on the third day or the first after three hours have passed from that day.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	But phlebotomy that is administered, more than anything it should be done when it is convenient and necessary, at night or during the day, at any time and at all times.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And a child should not be phlebotomized until he is twelve years old, and a pregnant woman should not be phlebotomized except from the fourth month to the seventh, and the elderly should not be phlebotomized when they have already passed sixty years of age.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And when someone wants to be phlebotomized for any reason, one should cleanse their bowels before the phlebotomy with a lion's cloak, if there is retained fecal matter in them, so that the veins do not push out the excesses in the phlebotomy of the bowels, which are purified, and that they do not harm the principal members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And phlebotomy should not be performed on patients with sacred nausea and vomiting, nor on those who have been cured of a disease or of drunkenness, unless there is no hope for their recovery, nor on the sick of dropsy, but phlebotomy should be avoided when colic pain and vomiting occur, and also when there is pain in the bowels, and when there is an increase in urine, or fever, or when there is a lot of coughing or work, or because of excessive eating or waking at night, or for any reason that weakens the body or the animal.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And before that, one should carefully consider the withdrawal of humors from him if his blood is thick, by means of foods and drinks, and by medicines if it is possible for him.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And enter a bath if any cause does not prohibit it, or exercise in some way so that the blood is thinned out.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And let him receive phlebotomy on his feet at around the third hour of the day, as we have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And it is necessary that his feet be protected on that day from all accidental evils of animals, namely: constriction, anger, fear, and from all corporal accidents, namely: excess work and unnecessary pain, cough and their likenesses.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And at his bath, let the causes be present in the use of which men usually sweat with aromaticity and odor, and with balms and their likenesses according to the amount of possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And let the phlebotomist follow on a cushion that is placed above the cushion of the one who is to be phlebotomized.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And then let him draw his arm and let the phlebotomist wash it with his hand two or three times; and then tighten the bandage and wrap it around twice.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And the bandage should be moderate, because if it is too tight or too loose, it prohibits the flow of blood; or if it is too tight, it prohibits the blood from flowing out.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And before the bandage, let the one who is to be phlebotomized rub his hands together so that the veins are swollen and made apparent to the senses.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And let the phlebotomist smear his needle with a little of that old oil properly; and then let him place the end of his needle on that vein, under the spot from which he wants to perform the phlebotomy, so that the vein goes away a little, and the compression is stopped because from those veins which are constricted like a string, blood will escape when the phlebotomy is performed; and from those which are swollen with windiness, when the phlebotomy is placed on it, it is contracted by the phlebotomist.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And therefore, let the phlebotomist be firm and solicitous in all these causes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And then let him pause the phlebotomy, but if the vein is broken in one go, then well; and if not, you repeat that again under that spot a little, or over it with compression, if the spot is not pustular.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the spot is pustular, or the sick person becomes frightened, then leave it for one day or two and do not tighten the bandage, because quickly it will draw out the pustule, nor should he enter a bath.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And let him repeat the phlebotomy if it is needed.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the appearance is small and the blood flows subtly, and you fear that it does not draw out the quantity that you want, then you repeat the phlebotomy on that vein according to its straightness and adjust it a little in the appearance, because the spot is pustular in most people due to little appearance.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	But if he is pustular already, then do not repeat on it, because it does not benefit you in any way; and pause over that spot some part of the oil of rose, because it attracts the blood.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And this is better for that spot than other oils.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	And likewise administer oil in all phlebotomies where the phlebotomist prohibits the flow of blood, and they do it with tyriaca and alfordoc when it is paused on that spot from one of those, because the blood is thinned out and is agitated when it is thick.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if a large pustule is engendered in the spot of the phlebotomy, because many times it happens, and especially to one who has not been bloodlet, except that go-around, or in the appearance of the vein little, and then you cut it, and pause over the spot sponge infused with water and salt, a little scorched, and tighten that for an hour, because it is dissolved.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And let him do this especially for the letting of blood from that vein with a compliment of him or of another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if it turns black or green in the spot for several days, do not be alarmed; and if you want to, pause over that spot some cause of aloe and myrrh dissolved, or some cause of juice of mallows or of chalcanum or its likeness.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	And many times it happens that pustules and protuberances are engendered by phlebotomy of the basilic vein.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And therefore let your hand be over it, and if you then tighten softness under it, then that protuberance is wicked and bad; and therefore take care to pause over that spot some cause of what we have said, because blood flows from the artery strongly.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And make a poultice with that in which it is tightened, so that the spot is hardened, and then cure that with another cure as it is healed.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And let them draw out blood from all men according to the quantity of their strength and according to the color prevailing over the blood.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	For if the blood is black, then you let it out until it is ropy; and likewise if you see it thick, then you let it out until it is thinned out; and likewise if it is sharp, until its keenness is lost.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And let him whose blood is full and strong and who has need of drawing out blood in one go be amplified the phlebotomy of the vein and the needle be long.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And in that which is swollen, let the contrary be done to it, and that which draws it out in many foldings, and that the bandage be tight.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	And the best method of phlebotomy for a vein is a cross-section, not a puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	And this method of phlebotomy spares blood flow and nerve injury, and is more admirable and safer than phlebotomy according to width and length.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And to whom it is accustomed to follow fainting after phlebotomy, and that you cure him before the phlebotomy with a little bread infused in wine of pomegranates or of oxymel simply warmed; and extract out of him some blood in three or four foldings.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if it is a fainting of complexional nature, then take before the phlebotomy bread infused in myrrh syrup or in aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and like, or in aromatic syrup and very odorous.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if fainting occurs following phlebotomy and the cause is excessive blood loss, then let him take to drink water of meat and odorous syrup very subtly; and use aromatherapy with aloes, and let him apply it to his feet with that.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use the other causes which we have said in the division in the chapter on fainting through evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And whoever wishes to open his arm and dissolve his blood secondarily, let him do to him of whom the phlebotomy is for great evacuation, and whose nature is cold, that he evacuates blood little by little, according to the quantity of the nature in consecutive days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	But whoever wishes to open his arm and drain his blood secondarily, and his body is strong, then let him do so seven or nine hours after the first phlebotomy.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	But whoever wishes to drain the blood of his body contrarywise to the part to which he inclines, let him be opened on the second or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	But a body in which much blood has already been warmed and is acute and causes fever, let him have his blood drawn in one folding and let a great quantity be taken from him and the appetite increased until fainting occurs, for you will have preserved all the conditions of phlebotomy; and place your hand over his pulse on the side of the body's blood, so that death does not occur instead of fainting, for many times this happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And do not press with force and bend it extended slightly when you wish to open the arm and evacuate blood secondarily, when the orifice of the vein is already closed and the flow of blood difficult; for this is very bad.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Have the phlebotomy site before it is phlebotomized again; or remain there with the acuteness of the phlebotomy which coagulates the blood in the orifice of the vein; or place on it tyriaca of alfarach, or of sagzenea, and compress it lightly until the blood has exited.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein is inflamed, then leave that and do not touch it until the inflammation has subsided.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if necessity compels you to evacuate blood secondarily and there is no excuse, then bleed him at that site or on the other arm in another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the vein called “the strings of the arm” is phlebotomized instead of the basilic or cephalic when they are not found or are hidden, for it is composed of those.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient immerses his hand in warm water until the vein swells and appears evidently.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	And then let it be tightened there with a ligature with a small string; and phlebotomy according to the small cross, not lengthwise nor according to the length.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And let the appetite be ample and let your phlebotomy of it on the joint of the hand be a little.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if the flow of blood is prohibited, then you repeat the hand in warm water and let the blood run in the water until you have accomplished your need.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	But if you are in the days of summer, then you are excused from the repetition of the hand in warm water, and the body of the blood is placed in warm water in the time of winter.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And the phlebotomy of this vein is more safe than of all other veins, for beneath it there is no pulsatile vein nor nerve.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And the phlebotomy of the back of the right hand is pertaining to the maladies of the liver.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of the phlebotomy is that you tighten the hand with a string or your hand, for you have placed it in warm water until the vein is swollen and it is clearly demonstrated; and phlebotomize it crosswise; and if you insert there at all it will not harm that.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And beware that you do not finish the phlebotomy of your hand, for beneath are the nerves of the fingers stripped of flesh.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And then repeat the hand in warm water and let the blood run in it, for if you do not repeat that in warm water, the blood will coagulate in the orifice of the vein and flow is prohibited.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And when the blood is extracted according to the quantity of need, then you place on the vein oil and salt, so that it is not consolidated clottedly; and similarly let you do in every limb tightly.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	But the advantage of the phlebotomy of that of the left hand is that it is pertaining to the maladies of the spleen.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And do similarly in the phlebotomy of him just as you have done in the other.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And the advantage of the cephalic vein of the phlebotomy is to maladies which are below the body, just as those of the mother, and to retention of menstrua, and to maladies of the knees and ulcers of thighs and similar to the maladies.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient immerses his foot in warm water and rubs it until the veins appear; and he places on the joint of the foot a bandage; and the site of the vein let him note by pushing down with the finger, and from there let it branch out in the fascia of the foot many ramps.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And therefore phlebotomize the most ample ram or below the ankle bone, for it is better and more safe.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you phlebotomize that in the fascia of the foot, then beware of the nerves which are below it on the fascia of the foot, and place your phlebotomy with the one with which you phlebotomize crosswise, as though you wished to pierce it.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And let the phlebotomies be mild.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	But if the flow of blood is prohibited, then you repeat his foot in warm water and let the blood run in it until he is evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the phlebotomizer erred in the first folding, then repeat with the phlebotomy on his few fingers, for the site is safe; and do not fear him malicious, but beware of the nerves just as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And similarly do to the cephalic of the other foot similarly.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And from the sciatic vein, the site just as we have said is below the ankle bone of the hind leg.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And the advantage of the phlebotomy of it is to ache of hip when it is by cold blood.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient enters a bath, and quickly and tightly ties his head on the side of the broad neck above the ankle above four fingers in one long, subtle bandage, for it does not appear except by this.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And then when it appears, you phlebotomize that according to each ability that is within your power and according to the crossover, and that is better; or pierce it with an incision or cut it with a section, for its location is salty.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And it is in most men hidden; and if you pierce that and it does not appear at all to the senses, then phlebotomize a branch of it, and that is what appears on the back of the foot opposite the ring and little fingers.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And beware of the nerves, and let the blood flow in the quantity you want.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	Then loosen the tightness and place a bandage on the site of the phlebotomy and tighten the area, for it is quickly healed.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Of ventilation and of the qualities of using them.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Vents are from horns or ram's horn or glass.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	And ventilation is done according to two methods: one of them is with a scarification and extraction of blood, and the other is ventilation without scarification.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this ventilation that is without scarification is according to two methods, for either it is with fire or without fire.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And the vents that are administered with scarification and extraction of blood are fourteen parts of the body, of which one in which vents are paused is alnocrati, and it is the back part of the head; and the middle part of two parts of the neck together; and vents from the chin below the jawbone and below the mouth; and vents from two spatulas; and vents from alloster, and that is on the end of the tail; and vents from two little fingers, and they are of two arms; and vents from two shanks; and vents from two thighs.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	And ventilation does not extract blood but from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and for this it does not have virtue through them, just as cauterization is through phlebotomy; nor is it believed that ventilation should be done with fire or without fire in any disease caused by repletion within when the whole body is evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	But if necessity prompts ventilation for disease or for continued, we administer that at the beginning of the month and at its end, and in the middle of it and at any time.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The reason for this is that in men the blood is multiplied within due to indigestion from extraction by ventilation and seeks тяжесть weight and fullness in their heads; and it is from those who seek repletion and heat in their faces and heads, and from those whose faces are puffed up, and darkness and weakness in their eyes; and it is from those who spit blood when they cough; and it is from those whose sleep is disturbed, and from those who see blood in their sleep, heat and ancientness and other causes to them resembling.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And therefore when any of those causes occur, and especially if it is in the third or middle of the month, then we command ventilation to be done after two or three hours have passed during the day.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And the benefit of ventilation of the nape is that when it happens to cause heaviness in the head and to that which is sunk into the eyes; but beware that this is not a complete evacuation of the whole body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this vent is in the place of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it is not advisable to use it when there is a complex fracture or when there is a hernia, for it does great harm to that.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And for this reason it is not advisable for the elderly and in the heads of those whose diseases are cold.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	But when that is continued over him it causes oblivion; and for this reason you should command the ventilator to pause his hand with the cupping glass on the upper parts, fearing the generation of oblivion.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	But ventilation of alkehel is in the place of phlebotomy of the dark vein and the basilic; and for this it causes asthma, and constriction of the throat and hoarseness, and coughing, and repletion.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	But it should be applied to the alkehel cupping glass a little, for if it is paused below, it generates weakness in the body and in the stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And ventilation of alhagdahan causes accidental pains in the head and to ophthalmia, and emisary, and pre-fever, and toothaches; and it is in the place of phlebotomy of the basilic.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And beware that you command the ventilator not to press his hand with scarification so that he does not pierce the artery and cause an outburst of blood.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And ventilation below the chin causes colic in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and resembling to them their diseases that are in the mouth, and they stand in the place of phlebotomy of alieric which is in the two lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	But the ventilation that is done on the two spatulas causes headache, which is caused by repletion of heat.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And the ventilation of the two ends inside the fingers causes benefit of phlebotomy of three veins, namely the basilic, dark and cephalic, for it draws blood from all those small veins in the flesh, and those small veins from the other larger veins within which it comes to the attraction to the three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And command the ventilator that he does not pierce too deeply in scarification, for the place is stripped of flesh, and below it are nerves and arteries.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And it is one cupping glass with which it is cupped above the hips and causes hemorrhoids of the anus and ulcers further below.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And beware that you command the ventilator that it is a large cupping glass, and that it is of ram's horn, for the location indigests strong section; and strongly draw its own deeply pierced cupping glasses subtle and be scarified with scarification.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	But cupping glasses of the legs are lessened due to manifest weakness, for they draw blood from all the body, and cause old pains in the knees and the mother, and the bladder; and they provoke menstruation, and cause hemorrhoids and ademil; and they stand in the place of phlebotomy of two sophens, and alahorcoben, and of two shanks.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	However, they weaken all the body and cause syncope in many men.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And of the cupping glasses alahorcoben their benefit is added to the benefit of the cupping glasses of two legs.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	And the quality of the position of the cupping glasses is that you pause the cupping glass at the beginning and suck through a warm tube, and do not prolong the position of the cupping glasses, but pause them briefly, and let the humors come to the site by intuition equally.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not cease to repeat that and continue until he sees the site already red and swollen and that the heat of the blood appears.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And then you scarify and iterate the suction little by little, and then consider the disposition of the body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	For a man who has thin skin, beware that you scarify him once and not more, so that the location is not ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And command the wind instrument player to amplify the scarification and take a few breaths, and temper the suction with ease.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if the vein is enlarged, then you should scarify in two places, for in the first place is opened the way of subtlety into the blood and moisture of it.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	But in the second to the scrutiny acquired from the extraction of the thick blood.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the blood is very foul, then scarification should be made in the third place so that the dross may be removed.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	And lastly, when we want to extract blood little by little or a small amount, one scarification is enough for us.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we want to extract a lot of blood, then we scarify with many scarifications; and if we know that the blood is thick, then we should scarify deeply.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the term of scarification in which there is only the depth of the skin.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if the person has thick, tough, dark skin, and their pores are tight, then the places on which the cups are to be placed should be anointed gently, widely, and liberally; in summer, with oil of aloe, or oil of violets, or oil of crushed almonds, or oil from the inside of a walnut shell; and in winter, with oil of nutmeg, or oil of lilies, or camomile oil, or blood, and similar things.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the superfluity is thick and foul, then the oil should be of marigold, or of sage, or of aloe, or of aniseed, and similar things.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	But if the person has wide pores of tender flesh, then oil should be prohibited; instead, the places on which the cups are to be placed should be washed with water or warm salt water, or with walnut water, or with water from boiling herbs, and similar things.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And if the blood is of great moisture, wash their cups with sour wine, or with water of myrtle and sumac, and similar things to those.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And for the person whose superfluities are thick, wash their cups with old wine, or with water of wormwood, which is marjoram, or of boiled aniseed, or of camomile, and similar things to those.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And so that the cupping treatment is kept before bathing; have them take a bath shortly after the treatment for one or two hours, and let them sleep after the cupping.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What shall be done when it is necessary to evacuate wind from a patient before cupping?
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	Consider the following: if the person to be bled and cupped is choleric with hot blood and inflammation, then take cold remedies, such as parsley leaves, and endives in sour wine, and leeks, and sesame, and julep, and similar things.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And feed them also with poultry, and meats of young birds, and seasoned dishes with vinegar, and similar things to those.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And for the person whose complexion is foul, have them drink honey water with alum, or honey water of sesame seeds, and sumac, and very fragrant wine between white and red; and let him be commanded to drink little and eat little, and give him poultry and cabbage and pigeons and small birds and colombier.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And so that on the day of cupping and phlebotomy, let his drink be greater than his food.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And let them be given to drink at certain times to some people theriac of alfarab, or medicines of musk, which is muscadine, or alcelita before cupping or phlebotomy, so that the principal members are comforted and the blood subtilized; and let them not take those hot drinks.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	But the cups that are after scarification should be placed over the liver, and over the melse and podagra, and over the umbilical, in the places of the joints, and the pixid of the elbow, for these members do not suffer scarification upon themselves.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And it is not desired for those except for bloodletting from the member, just as they pause the cup over the mammary gland in milk flux of blood from the blood of the breasts; and they use that to dissolve thick viscousness of the member, just as they pause over the belly and the umbilical; for that thins out the member and pierces it and releases the pain when it resolves the cupping.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And already it is paused over the testes when they occur in their swelling or pain, for by virtue of strong attraction their scrotum swells and eliminates the pain from its place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And similarly it does when it is paused over the liver and the spleen in those who have a hernia.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	And these cups are administered empty with suction only; and some times they are administered with fire.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And some times they are administered full of tepid water in the diseases of the spleen.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And this is why the cup should be filled and have a large opening; it is water alone or water in which herbs are steeped according to what is convenient.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Form of cup administered with fire: let the size of the orifice be two fingers, according to how we have formed it; and the quantity of the flame be the length of a palm; and be in the width of it, in the place that is in the circuit, the size of it, the hole be small according to the quantity that goes into it an needle.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	Let it be made of ram horn or citron wood, of thick margins, of lion, of ox hoofs and terses so that it does not sting the member when it is in its position over it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And let there be a transverse groove at the mouth of it, made of horn or of iron, where the candle with the fire is paused.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And already this cup be much larger than that which we have recommended; and the small one less according to the diseases and the condition of him who uses it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the cups of children and emaciated people are smaller than those of young and stout people.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the quality of placing this cup with fire upon the member is that it extends the heat with a decent fire of wood in front of a small candle of wax, and pause that upon the mouth of the transverse groove at the middle place of the cup, so that the fire be lit around the lower part so that the patient's body is not burned.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And then let it be paused over the member of the patient, and the finger be over the hole that we have said, during which when we hold the cups and do not see the finger and let the steam go over that hole, the cup is immediately dissolved.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And prop it heats the fire according to its way, and repeat that if it does not work out.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	But in cupping that is administered in the disease of pleurisy, with water, in which there is no transverse groove nor hole, and it is not administered unless it is filled with water, and it is paused over the member only.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is how it is: And this cup when it is larger, all the better, so that it can receive great quantity of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Chapter xcvii.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Bloodletting is not administered in small members but in the members in which it is not possible to place cups due to the smallness of those, such as the finger and the gum and similar things to them; or in a member stripped of flesh, such as the toe and similar things to them.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those that you have found leeches in the dark waters of clean blood.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	Then let them be left for the day and night in dark water until they become hungry, and no cause remains in the belly of those; and then the body should be evacuated at the beginning with phlebotomy and with enemas; and then the parts of the patient are to be rubbed until they turn red; and then they are to be placed on him.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are full and deflated.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if it is possible to suck the place with a ventouse, it is better for healing.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	And if not, then wash the place with wine vinegar and then with warm water; and it should be rubbed and expressed.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the body of the blood is prolonged by the action of the leeches and it is sweating, then you dip a cloth in cool water and place it on top so that the sweating is absorbed.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the blood is profuse, then powdered vitriol, or eggs and similar things from the class of astringents are sprinkled on it until the blood is staunched; or cooked fava beans are placed on the spot and left until the beans adhere to the spot, and the blood is staunched.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And if necessary, the repetition of leeches, when possible to change them.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if the leeches are prohibited from being suspended, then the place is to be rubbed with fresh blood or a needle is left in the places where it draws blood; and then they are to be placed, for those when feeling any blood at all drawn.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want them to stop, sprinkle a little aloe vera, or salt, or ash on them, and they will stop right away.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Thus begins the prologue of the third part: of restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is many times necessary in the art of medicine; it is a restoration of fracture and of accidental dislocation in the bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh son, know that boast of this chapter the foolish doctors and the vulgar and those who have not for some time regarded the books of the Ancients nor read any letter of them.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason the method of the scientists in our land is private; and I have not been obliged to do anything at all about it; and I have not used that which teaches, except through length of reading the books of the Ancients and studying on the understanding of those, so that I might extract the science from them.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And I have added to it experiment and study in the length of my life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have described in this chapter all that contains my science and about which my experience has passed; because I have abreviated it to you others and freed you from occupation of elongation; and I have abbreviated it in the end of abbreviation; and demonstrated it in the end of demonstration; and formed it in many forms of the instruments that are administered in it, as is done for addition of demonstration, so I have done in two preceding chapters.
Capitol primier.	First chapter.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Summary and collections from being fractures of the bones, from which whose premise is necessary, before we begin to remind of the members fractured and diverse if any.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Therefore, we take in the prologue of this chapter the summaries of speech; and the chapters at understanding which in the beginning is forced the artificers and to station on the truth of those; so you are and those who are prompt that know or learn this noble art from you.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And therefore I say that when accidents happen to anyone fracture or dislocation or twist or hernia, then you must first be careful with phlebotomy or washing it, or any poultice, if no cause prohibits, so as debility of strength, or is the one to which happened effant, or old in decrepitude, or is time of violent heat, or of violent rub.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And then it should be content in food of herbs fresh and of meats of birds and of crabs; and prohibited thick meats and to fill up with foods and all food that fills the veins with blood, so that you ensure safety from apostema cauterization, and if you do not fear effusion of matter to the member.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And then return the patient to his first regimen with which he used to be accustomed.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And therefore when the broken bone begins to be restored, then let the patient be fed with nourishing foods of mot and thick and heavy foods in which is stickiness, so as foods made of wheat cooked with water, and rice, and peas, and fish, and bellies of cows, and eggs, and fresh meat, and wine gross and similar to those, and with this regimen coagulation of fracture is done more quickly and better.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And know that the broken bones when they are in the elderly and in the weak, it is not possible that they be continued and be consolidated according to their nature by the drying of their members.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they are consolidated and continued according to their nature all the time by the drying of those members, and they are continued and consolidated which are of them in the end of softness, so as the bones of little children.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	But nature adjusts and connects on the broken bone of all part any cause similar to glue in which is thickness that adheres and strengthens together, so as fire at the beginning, so that no cause prohibits that from its works.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason it is necessary that you stop the foods of the patient, foods in which are heaviness and stickiness and thickness, so as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	Much diversity of fracture according to diversity of member.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And know that the species of fracture are diverse according to the diversity of members, for fracture of the bone of the leg is diverse from the fracture of the bone of the head; and the fracture of the bone of the foot is different from the fracture of the bone of the toe; and similarly all other members are diverse among them.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And I will come to remind of every species of fracture, expounded in its distinct chapter from another.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	Much diversity of fracture in itself.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And the species of fracture of the bone are diverse in their meteyssas; for there is made fracture arched another that happen in it stars; and some times fracture is made according to the length of the bone: and they are fractures of the satagia and asthels and additional proceeding and non-proceeding, so as it is made in the pen when it is prepared to write, and fracture am plaga and disruption in the head, and fracture fissure little.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And every species has pain or torment proper in its restoration according to what will come reminder of it distinct in its places.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	Much sign of fracture of the bone.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And for that is known fracture of the bone: its tortuosity and of that eminence and appearance of it to feeling, and so of it when you compress it with your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And therefore when there is not in the place tortuosity apparent nor is it made due to your touch when you touch the bone with agitation and the patient does not suffer great pain, then it is not here fracture.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	It is possible that there be tortuosity or small fissure, then do not you sting it with your hand and compress it with agitation and the patient does not suffer great pain, then hold over it of the medicines of which you remind him about it moment which suits the place; and then be tight by subtle restriction.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And you should know that the place where it is arched and not split into two or anything else that does not happen in it is called a satagie, as is the entire part of his body, then you must begin to rectify it with cautery.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if it happens to be cauterized, then let it be for a few days until the abscesses cease; and then heal it afterwards in whatever way you can, according to its nature and severity.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And you should know that the restoration and piercing of it is easier than the bone in which this satagie occurs.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And then strengthen it according to how it will heal.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	But if the satagia is in the bone, then it is necessary to extend that broken member into two parts, whether it be the arm or leg; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two cords or one cord and the hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And your position should be the one in which you place that member's joint according to its natural shape, while the parts are extended from the broken member; then you must pierce and return those attachments with skill and in any way possible for them.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And beware according to your strength that you do not cause pain or injury to the patient through your operation; and with skill, according to your ability, apply the one bone to its companion according to their best forms.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And you should touch it with your hand in that hour profitably, and if you see any other cause, rectify it and heal it according to the quantity of your skill.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And avoid violent extension and compression, as many foolish doctors often cause an abscess cauterized by their operation, or caused contraction in the member, as we have seen it happen through their operations many times.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	Then you should attach it, apply equity and decent operation and stricture of that member, and rest and tranquility; warn the patient about this and make him understand that he does not hurt himself in the hour of his vigils and sleep, and watch his revolution and agitation, and attend to his excretion, and attend to all his movements with all your skill; and see if the position of the member is a position by which the pain is secured, for its cause is when it feels in the disposition of the member's position pain or injury; then you must change it into another disposition from which he does not feel pain; and beware of this that the position of it is straight and healed, so that no tortuosity happens to the member when it is restored.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of the stricture of the broken member is that you consider it; because you should know that broken members are differentiated in their smallness and in their greatness and in the shape of them.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And of those which are small like the arm and finger and elbow and similar to them, then let their envelope be very thin cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	But those which are large like the thigh or leg, then let their envelope be hard and folded, because the folded band connects the large member and strengthens it all around with equal stricture, so that no stain enters it.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	Then you should begin, and your evacuation of equity, pause the convenient bandage over that fracture with three or four envelopes according to how the member deserves it; and strengthen your hand a little with the bandage.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And then go to it at the highest part of that fracture location, and strengthen more so that you do not focus your stricture with which you have strengthened the fracture location.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	And then lengthen it a little with the envelope at the fracture location, and loosen the stricture a little bit by bit as you take from the location a great part.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	And then take another bandage and wrap that other part over the broken location, and then go to the bandages at the lowest part of the fracture; and your operation in the stricture of the envelope and in loosening it shall be according to what we have said above about the first envelope.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And then pause between the envelopes of wadding or cloth with which it is healed the tortuosity of the fracture, if there is tortuosity in it; and if not, then do not pause for any cause.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And then pause over it another bandage, and then heal the decently-made stars over these envelopes immediately, if there is no inflammation or abscess cauterized at that location, and then pause over it whatever heals the abscess and stops the inflammation; and let it be for a few days; and then strengthen over it the stars.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And the stars should be of the thickness of a cane that is straight and well-formed, or they can be of wood, or of strips of palm tree, and their width should be according to this shape and figure:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, the star that is paused over that fracture should be thicker and a little bit more folded than the other stars, and the length of the star according to how long the member is in greatness and smallness; and then strengthen over it another bandage according to your first stricture; and then pierce over it with decent needle according to what we have said about stricture, and let the stricture be according to the location of the fracture, and as long as it is drawn away from the fracture, the stricture is diminished.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And let the threads be medium in thickness and sottlety, and they should be of fine linen; and if the threads are thick, as I have seen through the operation of some foolish doctors who fasten their threads with cords, and it is a great error when the stricture is not equal.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And thin threads are not convenient, because you will not achieve by stricture with them what you want, and there must be room for a finger between the stars.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient is hurt by the ends of the stars then strengthen it with wadding or cloth below so that it does not hurt him.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Sometimes the fracture is with swelling and occurs disruption in the tendon, and I have come to rectification in it in the head according to its singularity.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And you should know that not every broken member is tightened with stars on the first day; the cause of this is because the member, when it is large, you should not pause over it stars unless after a few days or seven or more, according to your security about the occurrence of an abscess cauterized.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	And this is the manner of the plasterers by which the Ancients restored, they were paused over fracture and dislocation and twisting.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Way of plaster as a remedy for the restoration of fracture, convenient to many complexities and especially to women and children, because it is that which does not come heat or friction: and take from flour powder, and it is the core of the flour that comes out with the movement of the mill in the walls of the mill.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And it is used as it is, but you sift it with white egg and pause the composition of it not thick nor sottile; and then use that.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another method of a restorative poultice for broken bones and dislocation and twisting: take assafetida, ladanum, acacia, enula, and myrrh, which is ground from wild pomegranate seeds, of all these ingredients take one drachma each; of mirra and aloe take five drachmas each; of aloes take twenty drachmas; mix them together and add to it either water or egg white if the patient's body is cold; and then use this poultice, for it has a good composition and quickly restores broken bones, and makes many men well.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another method of a poultice that makes well broken bones and twisting: take myrrh and met with white poplar, both weighing ten drachmas; mirra and aloe, five drachmas each; acacia, six drachmas; and armenian bole, twenty drachmas.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All of these ingredients are to be ground in a mortar and pestle, sifted, and made into a poultice with either water or egg white and then applied.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Method of poultice for joints and bones separated from their sockets, and for cuts and fractures: take soft wool and soak it in warm vinegar and oil and then apply it to the affected area.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	Add to this poultice verjuice for restoration, and add yellow wax to close and draw out pain effectively.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another method of poultice that restores broken bones: take leaves of the wild fig and leaves of wild poppies; pound them all together and make a poultice from them.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida .i.; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Method of poultice that promotes restoration, and resolves the swelling from fractures: take ground leaves of mallows, chamomile flowers and violet flowers, flour of ermine, of all these ingredients one part each; have them all pounded and made into a poultice with vinegar if the member is not wounded.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	But if it is wounded, then treat that spot with water of coriander soaked in wine or with water and his own urine.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another stronger method of poultice that effectively resolves swelling: take ground leaves of mallows and its seeds, balsam, mallow, majorana, violet flowers, chamomile flowers, all in equal parts; have them all pounded and made into a poultice with water of sage or warm water or wine, all depending on the quality of the member and the color of its pulse.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	But Hypocras does not dry in its own juice unless it is applied to the wounded member for its restoration, nor should a plaster of wax and oil be placed over it, but rather a cerot made from wax and oil; nor should it be allowed to become too thick or too thin.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	But Gualia says that plasters should be placed over the broken member for its restoration and the causes of drying due to hotness are also small like myrrh, onions and their likes according to those causes we have recounted.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	Method of poultice that treats injury and pain: take ground mustard seeds, sesames, human hair or bird feathers, mallow and salt in equal parts; have them all pounded and sifted and made into a poultice.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	But the amount according to the extension of the ligature and its proximity, you consider if there is not pain nor swelling nor that the bone is broken nor has come out of its socket, then you do not have to remove it for several days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if there is violent pain or swelling or inflammation in the spot, then you cut it off or remove that in the hour and stop the poultice from it.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	And take linen and sponge the sea lion in warm water, and with that wash the spot until the swelling and pain are ceased; then let the member rest for an hour; then apply to it soft wool soaked in warm vinegar and oil or rose oil, and let it lie over it all night so that the swelling of the hernia is secured, and the pain of it calmed.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat that subtle binding and small poultice, and do not tighten by your first constriction but subtly with it until it is healed.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if you see that the hernia and the redness and the pain and the swelling and all its accidents are already calmed, and you have ceased from poultice and binding, then you repeat that in the same way as you have done at first equally.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o .vii.; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if there does not occur to the member any of those causes we have said, then do not remove it but rather three or four or five or seven days; and some times all that is left for twenty days according to how you appear by the dislocation of the member, as we have said, until the fracture adheres and comes close to the coagulation of the flesh over it.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And then tighten the binding a little more than your first binding and in the thickening of the swelling of the member according to how it is preceded in its memory.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	But if you see the spot of the fracture dry and withered but not closed, then know that nourishment is prohibited from coming to it; and so soak that in warm water entirely for three days; and loosen the binding a little, and by this operation the member receives nourishment and is healed gently.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	But that which the foolish restorers of the broken member do is another way when it is not restored at first, as it is closed and twisted, is error according to their operation and great fear, and if it were straightened then the ancients in their joints would have been opened by them.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And I have not seen any of them do that, because it is more reasonable that it does not do that.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Chapter according to: Of fractures when they occur in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The species of fractures are various, and their figures diverse, and their causes distinct; for some fractures are made by the impact of a spear, and the impact stands all the bones inside the skull, the skull being beneath the bones as it were in a staff, and because of that this species of fracture is named impaction; or the spear pierces through some part of the bone and pierces the flesh around it without breaking into the brainpan, and because of this this species of fracture is called levation absolute.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the width of these two fractures may be great or small, and they are caused by compression or impact; and the cause of them is impact with a staff or stone, and to their likes.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture may be penetrating which approaches the membrane beneath the bone or is in the face of the bone, and the width of these two fractures may be great or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And of fracture is that it is broken in the bone, in the sottlety of hair small, and because of this this species of fracture is named capillary fracture.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And fracture is that which is made either by impact or by stone and to their likes, which makes some lamina of the bone enter into the spaces between the teeth, and is made in the concave place as it happens to the teeth when they receive impact and is broken into the spaces between the teeth.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	And most often this happens in the bodies of flat bones as in the heads of infants.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And so all these species of fractures are set, as nails separated.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And I will come to remember all that in its place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And you know all these species of fracture by detection on those and by inquiry into them with probes and examination of the corrupted flesh that is over them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And capillary fracture is known by that which is uncovered over the bone, and wiped clean, and lined over it with the probe, for the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	But in the cure of fracture consider at first the accidents of the body, and then if you see by the accidents that signify by manifest indication on fear, as it happens in cholera, and extension, and loss of understanding, and abdominal pain, and redness of them, and their likes to their major dispositions, although you do not heal.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if you see that accidents are not happening, then you can begin the cure.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	The reason for this is that if the patient has come to you in the beginning as it is in the days of winter, then you should study the bone before the 14th day according to all dispositions.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is in the days of summer, then you should cover the bone before the seventh day, so that what is below the bone becomes rotten by the skin, and so that the accidents that we have counted happen.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already reached the skin, and is in small pieces and crushed, then you should insert the crushed and ground-up part, according to what I will tell you.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And you should cut off the head of the infected patient and uncover it over the bone according to custom and manner for you to make possible according to the shape of the plague, and so that it is lighter on the patient.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if you see that there is a detection of the bone, flow of blood or pustule cauterized, then you should stop it with what is appropriate, and you should cover the area with cloth soaked in wine and rose oil, and make the plague rest until the pustule is soothed, and be sure to stop the flow of blood; then you may begin on the circuit of the bone and in its removal.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And this should be according to one of two manners of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the one manner is that you insert the bone with a very narrow incision knife, and this is its shape: And you should also administer another incision knife this one a little bit wider than the other; and this is its shape:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And you should also administer the incision knife that is wider than the second one.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And you should have many incision knives of different widths; some are wider than others, and some are shorter than others and are in the shape of acute angles, and are made of iron or steel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use them with ease in striking the incision knife so that it does not strike the head and cause damage to it.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is strong and hard, then you should drill into its circuit before you administer the incision knives with drills, which are called non-deep drills.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And they are not named like this but because these drills do not stop the end of the bone from that which is appropriate to it, so that when the drill is round-tipped or edged on its end below the sharp head resembling an edge or a small circle, it prohibits being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	And it is convenient that you take great numbers of these drills, each of which is convenient for the thickness of every bone, so that it is present in all parts of the skull whose end is acute, and the quantity in length and brevity is according to the quantity of thickness of this part.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	And this is the shape of three kinds of drills: The quality of drilling in the circuit of the broken bone is that you stop the drill on the bone and turn it with your fingers so that you know that the bone has been penetrated; then change the drill to another place, and pause what is between every crack the quantity of the thickness of the ray or environment.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And you should insert with incision knives what is between each crack of the bone, and make that as subtle as possible at the end of lightness, just as we have said, so that you radiate the bone, or by your hand, or by any other instrument which you will have prepared for this, just as tweezers and fine forceps.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And you should keep with great care so that the incision knife does not touch any part of the brain.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And when you have drilled around the bone and it is separated from the brain if it continues with it, then you should extract that, then cut and gnaw at it in its roughness with another instrument similar to an incision knife but however, it should be thicker and more subtle than the other incision knives.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if any small bones and splinters fall out, then you should pick those up with ease with whatever is convenient for you from the instruments; then you cure the plague with poultices and bandages which we have mentioned.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the other manner of operation is lighter and more distant from fear, which Gualia says and praises greatly; and this is its speech: It is necessary for you at the beginning to begin uncovering the part of the bone at the site where the fracture is most violent and most manifest, so that when you have uncovered that part and stopped it below with the end of this incision knife, which is long and gentle, and whose shape is as follows [image description]:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And the lenticular part is round and does not insert any cause, and the acute part is from it in two sides forward in length, just as a lever; so that the lenticular part is fitted to the brain with its sharp edge incident on the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And you should percute on the incision knife of one side with a small mallet so that you insert all the bone with ease just as it is turned, and you be sure that the skin does not happen to him in any way which you fear in any manner, and if the patient was the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly, and if he was sleeping.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	Then if it gives any cause annexed to the bone of the skin in some parts of bone, insert that from it with the end of the lenticular incision knife, and deliver that from it with ease because it is delivered from it without harm and fear.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the skin, and what is severed or is left of the bone is its edge, and fall out in it roughness and splinters, then you should cut that roughness and gnaw at those splinters with subtle razors which you have prepared their number, of different quantities so that it is convenient for you to administer them in every place the most appropriate of them and the most direct of them according to what you are led by your operation on that broken bone and its shape.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And you should administer in your reason with which you cut the bone at the beginning by the widest of those razors, and then use it also by the most subtle of them, and do not cease to do this according to continuity until you come to administering the thickest and most subtle of all of them.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	But in each of the other small capillary fractures and subtle fracture, you should administer cure according to what you are led by rectification of it.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And it is a cause that is not damped on all of which have studied in that art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And I stand on what we wrote, we have shown in great fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the skin is stretched when you radiate the bone, then you should take cloth according to the quantity of the plague, and soak it in rose oil, and pause that over the orifice of the plague; then take another cloth folded or doubled, and soak it in wine and rose oil and pause that over the first cloth and do this as gently as possible so that you do not harm the brain; then administer on that a bandage wide, and do not tighten it except by the quantity that the plague has, only.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And let this treatment continue for one or two days until you are sure that the ulcer is cauterized; and then remove it and administer medicines to reduce the swelling, such as flaxseed poultices and linseed meal, and powder of onions and pepper, and similar remedies.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And it is that you make these medicines into a powder that can be sprinkled over the wound, as they are dried; and generally, administer to him all medicine of the nature that cleanses and does not bite.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And be careful according to your ability that the wound in its healing is clean; and do not allow any dirt or other thing on it; nor let virulence accumulate on it; for when it is applied to the membrane of the brain, it corrupts and damages it, and malicious evil occurs upon the patient.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And it happens in the skull, when its bone is cleaned and mainly when the treatment of it is suppressed, and there is blackness on its surface; therefore consider that if these accidents occur to the patient as we have said, know that they are harmful without a doubt.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas .iii., e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if blackness does not occur except from the medicine that is applied on top of it, and it is due to that medicine which causes that darkness, then take honey in a portion and rose oil in portions .iii.. And with those lines, a cloth, and then apply it to the skull; and then heal that with the spices of healing that are appropriate so that he is cured.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter .iii.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	Of the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	Know that the nose is not broken except in two parts only, some of which are more prominent than others; because in it there are two bones, for the part below is cartilage, and it is not broken, and nothing happens to it except crookedness, tortuosity, and sinusitis.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	But if one of the two parts of it is broken, then you must insert your little finger into his nose, and close that fracture within with your index finger, and with your thumb outside, so that the nose returns according to its natural shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And it must be done by you for ease; and beware of causing pain to the patient due to that operation.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the most prominent part of the nose, and the finger cannot reach it, then let it be made equal by the end of the bone in which it is small in thickness.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in two parts, then you must do as follows:
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And be careful to restore it on the first day of the fracture, if possible; and if not, then after the seventh or tenth day, according to the rest of the ulcer.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And then insert into the end of the nose a plug of linen cloth if it is one fracture, or two plugs if there are two fractures; and let the thickness of the plug be as much as the amount that fills the crack in the nose.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And some of the ancient restorers say that the plugs should be dipped in honey, and changed every day; but I have not seen it; they say let the plug be dipped in honey comfit with powdered mulberry; and then let it remain so that the bone is firmed and the cartilage becomes hardened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And sometimes let a plug be inserted into the nose instead of a caliper, made of goose feather wrapped in linen cloth; and it is that when the fracture of the nose is more violent and that the patient is not prohibited from breathing.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	And this cause is not necessary for you; and if you want, do it, and if you want, make calipers.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if another ulcer occurs, plaster the nose with cerot or cotton saturated in white vinegar and rose oil, or with diaquilon.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	But if an ulcer does not occur, then let you plaster that outside with sesamum flour and pepper powdered with honey; and then apply a plug of linen cloth on it, and do not bind the nose with anything for any reason.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	But if the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or are comminuted, then split them and extract those with instruments that are appropriate for them; and then sew the cut, and heal it with what flesh-grows and hardens, and with plasters as is convenient.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	And if a ulcer occurs inside the nose, then let you heal that with plugs and administer lead tubes so that it is completely healed.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter .iv.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	Of the restoration of the jaw when it is broken.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jaw is broken and its fracture does not have an ulcer, look to see if the fracture is only outside, and is not broken into two and bent inwards at the ends; then its comprehension is difficult.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	And therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, let you insert your left index finger into the mouth of the patient; and similarly, if the fracture is on the left jaw, then insert your right index finger; and move it with ease at the ends outside, by your other hand from the part outside of the bone; thus equalize that.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two parts, then let you administer extension of both parts according to rightness so that its equality is possible.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if teeth occur with disruption, then strengthen those of which you expect that they will be broken by thread of gold or silver, or of silk; and then plaster the broken jaw with cerot, and then place upon it a double cloth, or a large plug decently made, or a weight of only one piece at the length of the jaw; and then tie that on top as you are equipped with its equipment, and as is appropriate for its application, so that it is not destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And command the patient to keep rest and tranquility, and provide him with food that is soft and not sharp.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you estimate that it is already altered in some way, then let you cut and loosen it on the third day; and then rectify what has been altered on it, and plaster it with pepper powder, with honey, or with sesamum flour, after you have removed its cerot, and place upon it wool cloth.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And then after that, when this plaster and adjustment on it is made, and the position of the bone is not altered, let it be left, that is not removed until it is healed and the fracture is strengthened; for often this fracture is healed in three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if another ulcer occurs, then administer what we have said several times in the treatment of it so that it is healed, and let the ulcer be licked by that.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture has an ulcer, then consider whether it is a broken piece of bone or a splinter, then you must subtilize those splinters with what is appropriate for that in the removal of them.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the hole of the ulcer is narrow, then you must widen it by phlebotomy according to the amount of your necessity.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And then after you have extracted those splinters, and if they do not continue to ooze, then let you sew the hole of the ulcer if it is wide; and if not, place upon that one of the plasters which is appropriate for that, so that it is healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter .v.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	Of the restoration of the collar bone when it is broken.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	Many times the furcula of the breastbone is broken in front of the muscle, and that fracture is made in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	Because it is either broken, separated, or separated in two parts other than the joints; and it is easier to restore it; or it happens that there are injuries to the joints, and it is difficult to restore it; or that the fracture is a plague.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And the operation on that, when the fracture is the plague, is that you have two ministers present, so that one has the assistant and follows the broken furcula, and the other extends the neck towards that part.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	Then fix the fracture with the threads within so that it is made according to its shape and there is neither prominence nor concavity.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if it needs more extension, then you have to put under the patient's chin a sponge or woolen ball, and the size of it according to the amount of your need; and extend and elevate the furcula and tighten the sponge with your hand within so that you fix the fracture according to its shape.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot pull the end of the furcula to the outside parts because it is reached by the prenon, then you have to make the patient recline on his neck, and put under the muscle a cushion half in size.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the ministers press the muscle from the outside parts under so that the bone of the furcula is elevated which is in the prenon above, and then you straighten the fracture and fix it with the threads.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	But if you feel injuries of the furcula and bleeding, then you have to cut on that and pull out those injuries with ease.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is retained in the bone, then you devise an incision of it with one of the saws which you have prepared for that, after you have put under the furcula the instrument that serves as a vise; and this instrument is of wood or iron and this is its shape:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And it is similar to a spoon whose concavity is like this; and its breadth is according to what you need from it, according to the size of the bone or the thickness of it.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	But its length is according to what is possible for you in the operation; that it has two ends like this, and one end is wide and the other narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the incision of the plague which you have cut when you have pulled out the injury of the bone is wide, and there is a risk of an abscess, then you join the two lips of the plague with a suture.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the disruption is little, or you fear an abscess, then you fill the wound with cloths and powders according to the quantity of the incision of the wound.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if there is an abscess, then you soak a cloth in warm wine and oil and place it over that.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	But the compression of the bone when it is without plague and without section is that you place a plaster made of wheat flour with egg white, and place a piece of linen over it, and then place the sponge under the chin of it if it needs from that, and then take a bandage, so it is twisted which I hold the Saracens , that it be very long, and its breadth is of one palm or around that; and then put powders doubled over the sponge and the plaster; and then take a stake of thin table whose breadth is three fingers and in length similarly; and then wrap that cloth around the stake at the place above the fracture location; and then place bandages as it is turned, and turn that over its neck and under its chin, and reduce that to all parts, and when times that the compression of the fracture with compression descending, and that is what is not hidden from you.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And all that it is not bleeding over the broken bone; and so you have to see the patient every day, that when the binding is softened or you see the stake is already bleeding, then you straighten that and strengthen the binding.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And then place the pillow of the patient under his neck, and place under his chin from below the pillow in the night a little cushion; so that with that is elevated the support of it of the side of that, and therefore is elevated the fracture of the furcula to elevation of the muscle; or be the arm of it tied to its neck.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not untie the binding unless there is sufficient healing or abscess within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And then renew the plaster if you have seen its face to that, and tighten in the compression and restore that and leave it until it is restored and the fracture of the furcula is coagulated.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it is strengthened and comforted according to the month in twenty-eight days, and some times in some men is done in less time of that.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter .VI.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	Of restoration of fracture of the shoulder.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The spatula is broken in its lateral place and not broken from it except its margins.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And therefore when it is broken in its place — and it is broken in the middle of it — and it is not connected except by contact, then according to the figure of the fracture you make the preparation of it and reduce that according to the natural figure in all manner of engine which is to you possible.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	And then place on the place powder of wheat with egg white and piece of linen; and then place doubled cloth; and then place over it stake bent of thin table according to the quantity of the spatula all or more little.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	But if under the stake is concavity in some of the places of the spatula, then you fix that concavity with piece of linen, and then position the stake according to equality.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And then strengthen above with a long bandage with decent compression and with firmness of the stake so that it is not bleeding from its place.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And consider the binding every day; and all times that it is softened, bind another time and tighten it and adjust the stake if it is bleeding from its place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And watch over the patient on his side.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	And the spatula is restored in twenty days or in .XXV.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And therefore when it is completed that number, then you dissolve the binding, and so you know assuredly that that is of the bones of which the beginning is not feared nor their dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if process of the place of the bone weighs and put under it the thread, then you cut on it, and support it, and do according to what we have said in the fracture of the furcula of fear of abscess if it happens here.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter .VII.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	Of restoration of fracture of the foot.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The feet sometimes are broken in their middle and that usually inside; but the ends of it most often that they are not healed and crushed.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And of the accidents of it when it is broken in its middle it declines to the parts inside and there happens to it great pain, and difficulty in walking, and coughs, and fever, and vomits blood; and it is declared in the cavity in the broken bone and it does not hide from feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And its restoration is that the patient reclines on his back, and place between the shoulders of it a cushion; and then press the muscles of it, and adjust the ribs of it with the hands of two cost, and subtilize in the operation of it and in the adjustment according to all manner which is to you possible and that convenes to that, so that return the figure of the bone according as it is said.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	And then place a plaster and a bandage on the patient, and place a thin board made of poplar or willow, or something similar in shape, on top of it; and then wrap that in a cloth; and gently tie that to the broken bone with a thin string; and bind that tightly around the back several times, and tighten it decently; and consider the binding at all times, and when it is loosened, tighten it.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	And if the need arises to remove the bandage because of any redness or inflammation, or pain, or abscess that occurs in the area, then you should cut and loosen it, and remove the plaster, and correct what has occurred through the manner of its treatment; and then return the plaster, once the face has healed; and adjust the binding so that it heals.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	Of the restoration of broken bones.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	Know that fractures of the ribs occur only in large places that follow the back; and of their ends, in front, they do not occur to those except through what is cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And its knowledge is not concealed from the feeling due to the inquiry of it with the fingers.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration should be in such a way that it joins the fracture with the fingers according to the possible manner, as long as it is swallowed according to how it covers, and then plaster and tighten the broken bone with a bandage, if needed for that.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And if the fracture of the ribs is declining to the inside parts, then it occurs in the patient violent pain and piercing, as well as piercing that occurs in him who has pleurisy, and due to that which puts the membrane on the bone; and it occurs in him difficulty of breathing, and coughing, and vomiting blood; and this one is of difficult cure.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And already the antibiotics are born in that with many ingredients.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And of them I say: that you place poultices on the patient who engenders inflammation and swelling, so that the belly is inflated and extended, and the fracture is pushed to the outside parts.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	But let us first eat that so that it is not a lesser cause to generate an abscess with cautery, if it does not occur; and if it already occurs, then let it help with that.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And some of them say that a poultice should be placed above and that it should suck strongly; and it is like reasoning, but nevertheless it is feared that the poultice throws the superfluities to the place due to weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	And some of them say: that the place should be covered with wool that has already been submerged in hot oil, and that there are placed powders between the ribs so that it is filled, and that the binding is tied as you wrap that according to roundness; and let the patient be treated for pleurisy with poultice and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if it causes violent constriction in the patient who does not suffer, and the bone pushes the membrane with piercing pain, then fear for the patient, and let there be cut on the spot, discovered of the broken rib, and then place over that instrument that conserves the cipack, the remembrance of which is preceded, and that we pierce the bone with ease, and extract it.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And then let us sew together the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a stitch, and heal that with plasters as long as it is healed.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if an abscess occurs inside, then cut and put powders in rose oil and place it over the spot, and let the patient be treated for that with what covers the inside of the abscess.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And let him lie on his side over which he sleeps, as long as he is healed.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the spine of the back and of the neck.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Sometimes it is a fracture in the bones of the neck, and sometimes it affects them with attrition, and similarly in the vertebrae of the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And when it occurs in someone and you want to know whether he will be healed or not, then consider that if his fingers are already softened and stupified and dead and cannot move them nor extend them nor tighten them, and when you pinch them with your fingers or pierce them with a needle and do not feel pain in them, then know that it is not healed, and in the same of dispositions it is mortal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if they move and feel constriction in them with the fingers and piercing, then know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient will heal with treatment.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you see the vertebrae of the neck like that and want to know whether it will be healed or not, then consider his feet.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	Then if you see that they are already softened and that occurs in them what occurred in the fingers, and then when he lies on his back, he has windiness and ejaculation against his will, and sometimes he lies on his back and wants to urinate but cannot, then know that it is mortal, and therefore you should not treat him.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	But if none of those occur, the cause is better and less distant.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And the treatment of him is that you persevere in the application of the poultice with cautery which you place over the atrissat vertebra, with oil of rose alone, or with seeds of wild onions; place it on that some times a day as long as the abscess cautery is sedated.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And then place one of the comforting and exciting plasters, and tighten that with a bandage; and command the patient to use rest and tranquility, and not to sleep on the side that causes him pain as long as he is healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if it occurs due to the attrition of the bone or any other cause that is already separated from him, then cut above the tendon and let them tie up that bone; and then sew together the two lips of the wound with a stitch if it is large; and then heal that with some embrocation of the gums, as long as it is healed.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	But if it is broken the end of the bone of the shoulder blade, and it is the end of the coat, then let you insert the tip of the left hand into the hole, and join the broken bone with the other hand according to what is possible by second apposition; and then place a plaster and splint over that, if needed for them, and then tighten that.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel broken splinters in him, then open that and tie up that bone, and heal the wound with the treatment that has been preceded as long as it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De restauracio de la ancha.	Of the restoration of the shoulder.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the shoulders often become broken, and if they are broken, then the fracture of them is only a separation in their ends and they are inserted into the length and decline to the inside parts; and it occurs in the patient violent pain in the spot and piercing, and the shoulder is stupified when it is broken.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And its restoration is that you extend your hand over that as long as it is over the fracture, which is the figure of it.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	And if the fracture is only in its end, then you join that according to what appears to you by second apposition as long as it is assembled into its natural figure.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	But if the fracture is in the length or what already declines to the inside parts, then let the patient lie on his belly as long as you prepare for its restoration of that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And therefore when you have joined that, place a plaster over it, and then place over that a splint of wood or of tendon, and tighten that by which you do not fear piercing of fracture nor removal of the splint.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And fill the cavity with what fills it according to its capacity, and instruct the patient to sleep on his back or on his side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	But if an abscess occurs, then cease from the extension of it and its restoration until the abscess is suppurated, and place upon it that which dries it according to what has been preceded; and return to the restoration of it, and tighten it thus with a bandage.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if there occur in the bones cracks or they are crushed, then you treat them.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	On the restoration of a fracture of the elbow.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	The elbow is that which is between the cuff and the head of the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is fractured, then its restoration is in one of two ways, one of which is that you take a plaster of moderate thickness according to this form:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And there should be tied at both ends two ligaments, and it should be suspended from the elevated place.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And let the patient follow on a chair; and then bend out his fractured arm over the beam until it reaches the tip of it in the middle of which is attached the curve of the beam.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And let it be suspended over some heavy object, or the assistant extend the arm to its limits; and then let the doctor and his assistants press the fracture with their hands, until the fracture returns as it should.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And the other way is that the patient be reclined on his neck and suspend his arm by a band from around his neck; and then instruct two ministers, one of whom has what is above the fracture with his hands, and the other has what is below him; each of them extending to his limit.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want the extension to be stronger, then tighten with a band over the fracture and another over that, and each of the two ministers extend to their limits.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And therefore if the fracture is near the end of the bone, then it must be placed half of the band over the tip and the other below the fracture under the elbow.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And similarly if the fracture is near the elbow, then it must be placed over that location and over the elbow.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Gently apply it without pain and then when it is well applied, tighten it if an abscess does not occur.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	But if an abscess occurs, then let the constriction cease within seven days, and place over it fine wool soaked in wine and rose oil until the abscess drains, and then tighten it.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	And the way to tighten it is that you place plaster over the fracture and then place a wrapping of new cloth over the plaster; and then bend the arm over that elbow, and place your open hand over his bicep.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And place the cloth and tighten it over the elbow so that the arm is in a stellate position, unless prohibited by some cause of the fractured bone.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And then use splints.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And it is that you place over the fracture that splint which is wider and stronger than the other splints; and place between each splint the width of a finger, and let the length of the splints be according to the fracture with an addition of three fingers in total.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And then tighten over the splints with that constriction which has been stated at the beginning of this chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And it is that your constriction over the site of the fracture be tighter.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And when the fracture is more elongated, then the constriction is less.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And therefore if you see the position of the splints and the constriction as we have said in the time in which you restore the limb to its setting, then do it.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear an abscess, then let the constriction and splints cease on the seventh day as we have said.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And then consider the band in all parts for three days so that no abscess occurs at the site or inflammation; or it is prohibited for food to come to the limb due to disposition of excess constriction; and then rectify all that as we have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	But if you are sure that it does not occur due to that, then do not remove the bandage except after three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And let the patient sleep on his back, and let his arms be over his stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And place over the elbow a poultice of wool soaked in water, and consider throughout the night or day that it is not looser nor softer, or that the band is柔軟ized; then rectify all with your skill.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And place the patient's food according to the order which we have given before, so that it is subtle at the beginning until it is started to be tightened; and then let it be thicker for him.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	The habit of the elbow and his arm is that they are tight for forty days; and then let them be looser and a bath be administered to him and he be anointed with ointments which rectify it.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is healed, then you do not remove from that the band and splints until ten days or two months.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter 12.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	On the restoration of a fracture of the arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	An arm is made up of two bones which are called two bones; one of which is small, and it is that which pushes the finger, and the other is large and is that which is placed below the small one, from the part more below.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And usually it is only fractured the larger bone, or the smaller, and rarely are they both fractured together.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when the small bone is fractured from above, then its restoration is easier, and its healing is easier.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when it is fractured below, then the fracture of it is bad, and its healing is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	Worse than that is when both bones are fractured together.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore if the bone which is fractured is the small one from above, then it is convenient for the doctor, in order to restore it, that he apply a slight extension with ease so that it is soaked.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	But if the large bone is that which is fractured, then it must be applied a stronger extension.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both bones are fractured together, then it must be applied the strongest extension.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And let the figure of the hand be placed in order to restore it and the extension of it be extended over a pillow, and the wrist of the hand to the parts above, more out than all the others fingers, and the little finger be more down than the others fingers, and the patient be recumbent on a raised pillow.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And let one pillow be before him in his height or sideways from him so that the patient does not struggle too much.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	And then let the assistant extend the arm from the part more below with his hand or with a band, and another assistant extend over it similarly.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	And then let the doctor soak the bone so that it is reduced according to the best figure which he can.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if in the forming of the bone there are bumps, then thoroughly reduce all pressure on it with your skill.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if it appears in him separated that it pierces the tendon and you do not have hope in its healing, then stop it and treat it according to the way which we have said over it.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	But if the fracture is with pus, I have already done in that chapter singular, and therefore take the cure of it.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then you should line a cloth with ceratum made from rose oil and white wax, making it medium between thin and thick, and tightly wind the cloth around that abscess until it subsides; then remove the ceratum and apply a plaster prepared from flour with egg white, and then apply leaves; let the leaf which is applied over that fracture be more moist and stronger.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And know that the number of leaves on the arm varies according to different dispositions, or whether the fracture is in one or two places together.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	Then apply your ligature over the site of the fracture more strongly and more aggressively, and as the ligature loosens at the ends above the fracture or at the lower ends of him, loosen the ligature a little bit according to his memory in the beginning of the chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the cloths that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft and moistened, and not hard or rough, and the thread with which it is tied should be medium between thin and thick, as we have recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	And consider the member and its ligament for a few days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if there is any cause why rectification is necessary, as you find out about the member, then you should bathe the member with warm water until that discomfort ceases.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And let the member not be constricted while resting, and then return the ligature.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the ligature is already loosened and the bone is already healed and like those, then rectify all that with your skill.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And consider more if the nourishment is prohibited from coming to the member due to excess ligature, then loosen that a little and let it be for a few days until that nourishment runs to that, and then tighten that.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	But if there is no cause in the patient of those which we have said, then it should not be loosened for about 20 days or so.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And then the patient's hand should be suspended by his skill of agitated movement, and let him sleep on his back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	And know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or around 32 days, or rather it is restored in 28 days, and all that is according to the disposition of the complexities and dispositions of skill.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter 13.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	Of the restoration of fracture of the thumb and fingers.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	Know that in the thumb of the hand and the nails of the fingers where there is fracture, and not happening to them but many times repeatedly.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when fracture or sprain happens to the hand, then let the patient follow lying down and in front of him lie facing according to equality, and then put his hand over that extended.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	And then the minister extends the broken bones and the doctor greases those until they are smooth with good cohesion.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And then let him apply plaster and lint if there is no abscess; and then apply leaf above according to the quantity of the site, and you have already wrapped that in cloth.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	But if the cut is in the parts within the belly of the palm, then make a bandage of cloth, and command the patient to tighten that with his palm cut; then let it be tightened with long cloth.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And let the leaf of meat with cloth be on the part where the meat is lifted, so that the meat is applied to the palm; and tighten that according to how it should be.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	But if the fracture is in the parts outside, then let him apply above leaf and another leaf of the lower part on the palm, so that the hand is opened and straight; and then apply the ligature, as the hand is rolled up to the wrist between the fingers with ligatures.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	And if there is fracture in any of the nails of the fingers, then if it is the thumb, let it be greased according to how it should be and then let it be tightened with the palm; and if you want, apply to him small straight astound so that the fracture is elevated and not bruised.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	But if the fracture is in the other fingers, as well as in that of the middle, or the pointer, or the ring, or the small finger, then let it be greased and tied with the finger to which he belongs; or they are all tied according to continuation, and that is better; or apply to him small leaf over that, as we have said in the thumb.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider in your restoration, and then that, the disposition of abscess is opposed – by your operation – to what happens when there is any cause of those, according to how it is repeated his narrative.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter 14.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	Of the restoration of fracture of the bone of the thigh.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The bone of the thigh many times is broken and is declared to feeling according to how it is converted to the front party and to the most upper.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	And the restoration of it is done in that the ligature is tightened over the fracture and another ligature below the fracture, and the patient lies on his belly and face down.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	And then the minister extends all the ligature to its part according to quality when the fracture is in the middle location of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	But if it is near the root of the thigh, then let the ligature be near the hollow to the part of the pencil, so that the extension box in them, and the other ligature below the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And likewise if the break is near the hollow, then let the ligature be made near the hollow, and let the extension be to the lower parts.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And then the doctor greases the bone with both his hands within so that he reduces it according to the natural resemblance and the bone is joined by good junction; then let him apply plaster and ligature if there is no abscess in the member.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	But if there happens to him abscess, then you leave that for a few days until the abscess is subsided, and then return to your cure.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The ligature of it is done thus: cover over the fracture with a hard bandage and fold that two or three times, and loosen from him superfluous; then wrap the thigh so that it comes to the ankle and the root of the thigh.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And insert long wire between the thigh and the leg near the hollow to the lower parts, and let the ends of the wire come from the most upper party of the two parts, and then roll over the thigh and the leg that which superfluous of the bandage.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And then apply to the thigh in the site of that fracture splints, and apply one of those a leaf over the bone of the leg.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	And then fill the emptiness between the thigh and the leg with soft cloths so that the ligature is coagulated.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And then begin with strong ligature of the middle over the site of the fracture with three or four wrappings, and as you find yourself more with ligature of the site of the fracture, let your ligature be less and lighter and moister.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	And then extend to two ends of the wire to the lower parts so that it comes to the ankle of the foot, and tighten both ends of the leaf from the other part so that the ligature is not loosened from its place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And then loosen the ligature over that, when there happens to the member corrosion nor abscess nor inflammation and likeness to those; and if there is any cause of those, then know you with loosening from him, and rectify all that happens to him altogether, as we have said many times.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	But if there is pain in the bone and it becomes infected, then you must have it lanced as much as possible; if not, cut over it and let it drain, and heal with that which has been preceded by remembrance until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And sometimes this fracture of the thigh is made strong by means of splints, as we have said in the case of the arm and the shoulder.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	But in the restoration of it in such a way, let not the patient have any limp; and if it is restored alone, then let that one to which the other leg is applied have a limp; it is necessary for this to happen temporarily.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And know that the thigh is made strong in 40 days or a few months or a few years; and all of this is according to the diversity of the complications and other dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter .xv.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	Of the restoration of a broken patella.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	Know that the patella breaks easily, but it happens to it many times straining.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	But if fracture happens to it, then it is nothing more than a split or crack in its parts; and this is with pain or without pain, and over it all is the skin or the membrane, and on top of that is the flesh or the membrane, and on top of that is the skin.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And the restoration of it is such that what is broken in its parts is lanced with the fingers until it is joined and aggregated according to what is possible by means of cautery and ease and fabrication.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	Then apply ointment and place over it a round splint, if it is needed by that; and strengthen it with a tight bandage to what is appropriate.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	And consider all the dispositions which we have recommended in the other fractures, as well as pustules and sores and what opposes everything that happens to it by means of that with which it is convenient for it until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter .xvi.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	Of the restoration of a broken thigh.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	Know that in the thigh there are two bones of which one is thick and is called by the name of the thigh; and the other is thin and is called the fibula.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And happens to each of the kinds of fracture what happens to both bones of the arm, and for this the restoration of it is done in the same way as the restoration of the arm lanced, and the operation on it is one and the same.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if both bones are split apart, then the thigh is broken into all parts.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if the thinner bone is split, then the thigh is broken towards the front.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if the thicker bone is split, then it is caused by those things which are not made by you.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	Then administer extension and cautery and ligation of the splinters according to that lancing.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	But nevertheless, if the fracture of the thigh is flat having many splinters, then let the extension be less and more distant, and drive out by your virtue.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And in the thigh is some cause of operation on the arm, and it is when you lance the splinters and complete all your operation; then take weights made of wood which are paused from below by means of strings which are paused in soles, and make them a covering of white palm leaves; fasten those of which there is small thickness, and let it not be of the fingers, and let the length of those be according to the length of the thigh, and of the knee to the most bottom.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	Then wrap over each drape in two coverings according to the length of it; and pause one over the part of the thigh on one side and the other on the other side, and let them be of the knee to the bottom-most place of the leg.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	Then tie the two splints in three places at both ends and the middle; by means of this restriction the thigh is prohibited from bending at the right and left parts, and it stands in good position.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And a brace of wood has been administered according to the length of the thigh; and let it be paused on it so that it conserves that from movement.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And more often let you do this in fracture, and when there is pus properly.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And consider in each day the thigh and study it by means of later study; and let you guard it from pustules and sores or other like causes; and when any of those happens to it, then apply to it that which is appropriate until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter .xvii.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	Of the fracture of the heel and of the bones of the leg and of the toes.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	To the heel does not happen fracture altogether; but to the bones of the leg happens fracture sometimes; and to the toes of the leg happens fracture scarcely, and only happens to them a sprain in the months of disposition.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if to the bones of the leg there is fracture and those bones are raised upon themselves between them, then let the patient raise his leg on the ground prepared in this way.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	Then pause one foot over that which is raised by those bones, and press them and lance them until they turn in the joints.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	Then apply ointment and stop it over that, and pause underneath the belly of the leg a small table to which are two pegs placed.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	Then strengthen that by means of the leg with extension downward because you have wrapped it in drapes and other like causes.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And when three or four days have passed, then loosen the bandage; for you will find the bones lanced, or split, or dislocated, and the operation on them is likewise.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	But if some toes are split, then restore those, and lance them in the same way as you do in the restoration of the fingers of the hand.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	Then pause over the split toe splint according to the length of the toe, and let it be more inclined from that; then underneath the leg pause this table which you have considered, and strengthen that by means of extension decent.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	But if that which is split of the bones there are two or three or more, then pause over each toe splint according to its quantity wrapped in linen cloth; and strengthen the table at the bottom-most part of the leg, and let it stand on one of the pegs of the table by means of a hole in the belly of the leg so that it has good retention.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is convenient for you that you not forget that you not consider all the causes which we have told you in the other fractures of the accidents which we have said; and apply to every accident that which is appropriate.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter 18.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	Of the fracture of the neck of the femur, and of the bone of the penis and of the virgin's clitoris.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the neck of the femur is broken, then make that woman lie on her side, and tilt her towards the direction of the back a little, and let her be held from behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And the midwife fills the crotch with cotton, and let there be made in the neck just like a spear; and let the woman be shaken, and raise her back little by little, because everything that has been forgotten is inside when it is in front of the neck like a spear and the broken bone returns.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And then stop powdering her back, and when he wants to urinate, loosen the crotch with ease and let him urinate, and reduce it and return in the same way as you treated it at first, and let him return to his first powder.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And do this for seven days or so, because that is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you want, take a lamb's bladder and stretch a candle over the wound; and insert the whole bladder into his neck, and then puff air through the candle so that the bladder is inflated inside the neck, because the fracture will return.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And let it be filled with cotton and stay for a few days as we have recommended, until it is healed.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the bone of the penis or clitoris is broken, then administer in its restoration and piercing what we have recommended for the hip bone.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And what is straight is not hidden in these nearby fractures and that little happens, especially to him who has some study and understanding of this my book; because that fracture means for you in the greatest dispositions a direct path in its restoration and in its stricture, so understand well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	But in the virgin's clitoris when it is broken, take a goose egg and put the clitoris into it; and then place over it a cloth wrap, and let it be wrapped, and let it be left for three days or so, and let it be healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter 19.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	Of the restoration of fractured bones when they are swollen.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient for him to whom the fracture occurs with swelling, and especially if the bone is large like that of the thigh or of the buttock, or similar to it, that you treat and flebotomize him immediately if the conditions of flebotomia testify so as we have said above.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the swelling flows blood, then know that you treat its retention in the same way as you powder it with powdered zinc, unless another cause is present.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And then begin to restore the fracture on that very day, and do not prolong it, if apostema does not occur.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	But if the apostema becomes cauterized, then let you leave off its restoration until the ninth day, while the apostema subsides, and do not approach it on the third day and the fourth of all, because you will cause malignant accidents.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	But if the fractured bone is prominent above the uncovered tendon, then know that you must pierce it to reduce and smooth it with your hands with ease and with little extension.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	But if extension is not prepared for you and the equation of it with your hands, then you reduce it with your hands with this instrument; and this instrument is made of iron, the length of which is seven or eight digits and the width of which is according to the amount of swelling; and it is necessary for the doctor to take these three or four according to the amount that he requires in the cure in every kind of fracture.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And it is rounded and has a little thickness so that it is not bent by the pressure upon it during the hour of the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And its upper part has an acute end which is beveled at the edges; and its underside is inclined, and it is thicker in the middle and inclines towards the ends.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is its form:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	And approach the instrument to the swelling so that you place its acute end over the fractured bone with ease. And it is named in Greek "labre volentz atelarem", so it is a little palette.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	So that its acute end be placed elevated over the prominent end of the bone.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And press it in a wayward manner so that the bone returns, and let it be smoothed with some equation.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And therefore press you to smooth the ends of the fracture between them, and if the end of the broken bone is thin, and do not take that instrument by good approximation, then know that you must insert the end of that bone so that the instrument has power over it.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	But if you cannot reduce the bone at all in the way we have recommended, then insert it with what is convenient for it from the incisers which we have mentioned; or saw it with one of the saws in whatever manner is possible for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	And then rub that which is rough and has small scars.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone is reduced and moreover the reduction causes the patient intense pain, then know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and therefore do what you confer with the patient great benefit.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When you have completed the restoration which you do to the bone, then immerse cloth in black astringent wine, and properly if it is in summer, and do not place cerot or any other cause over the swelling so that no putrefaction and corruption occur in it.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And then administer stelas in the hour of your completion of the restoration of the bone, and leave the swelling uncovered so that you may insert the wound with tweezers and use bandages according to the amount of swelling.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And guard yourself with all caution so that you do not strain the swelling with the fracture, because many times they have done this the foolish doctors and caused over their patients death or a malignant corrosion or putrefaction, and it is so harmful.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if your stricture is loose, soft, different from the stricture of other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the swelling is great or is bad, and you fear over it some harmful accidents which we have recommended, and there is pain in the place, then know that you must not pause over it astelas, but do to that an envelope of hard cloths instead of astelas and tighten it with those.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And when a day or two has passed since the swelling began and there is engorgement in it, then you must place over it the cloth with which you covered it with wine, and then administer hot waters, with which usually doctors medicine swellings, thus with tetrafarmacon and similarly.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	And it seems to you that you loosen the ligature and consider the swelling at dawn and evening until it is consolidated and closed up, and know that the member be prepared in such a way that the putrefaction flows from it to the ends with ease.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If the swelling passes several days and is not consolidated or is not abscinded from it the engorgement, then know that here you are at risk of the small pains for which you must treat the swelling with tenting.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And of those small pains which are separated and extracted, those from which the member is not separated and they cause pain, pierce them according to what you can.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	And if it happens that the plague becomes swollen or bright red, then it is stinging nettle, or another species of corruption and putrefaction, then you must apply to each one of them what suits them from the cure, of which the narrative precedes in their own chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o .xxx.; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And in which you must stand firm with your speech and make your request: when the leg is broken, it protrudes over the limb just like the bone of the thigh and the helper, and similar to those of the large limbs, and do not assume attraction from it, nor extraction of it for many times death happens through that; have the patient lie on his side so that he can rest, for often he will fall on his own after about 20 or 30 days. And then cure the plague if you have seen it, and if not leave it alone.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter .20.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	Of the cure for nodules that happen on the path of a fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Many times this nodule happens on the path of healing from a fracture, and most often it is near the joints, and by it the shape of the limb is distorted; and very soon the limb is prohibited from its natural operation.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Therefore consider if the nodule is recent and administer to it medicines that have astringent properties like aloe, and thistle, and marjoram, and acacia, and similar to these; so that you take from those some or all of them, and mix those with white wine, or sour wine, or sweet wine, and apply that to the nodule on a piece of cloth, and constrict that around it with a good constriction.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	And let the constriction stay on for many days so that it does not come undone for several days; and then loosen it and repeat another, while the nodule is being softened; or press a sheet of lead gently on top, because lead has the property of softening anything swollen in the limbs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if the nodule is already converted into stone and it is tight and necessitates being cut open, then split that through its uppermost part, and excise the excess and prominent part, or pierce that with some sharp instrument so that it is softened; and cure that which has been cut.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter .21.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	Of the restoration of a fracture when it is restored and then the limb becomes weak and frail not according to its nature.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture is restored, and then the limb becomes weak and frail, that is not done except for many causes: of which one cause is the abundance of soluation of the ligament and of the binding of it done not according to how it should be; or by excess of constriction of the ligaments so that nourishment is prohibited from running to the limb; or by abundance of superfluous embrocations; or by superfluous movement not at the right time; or by lack of blood in the body of the patient and by its debility.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	And the cure for that is to make the patient eat and to make his heart tender so that blood is multiplied in him; and administer a bath; and apply oil and lettuce over it.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	And then apply poultice over the limb so that the poultice brings many nutrients to it, or continue embrocation of it with warm water so that nourishment runs and returns to its natural figure.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter .22.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	Of the cure of broken bones when they are restored crookedly and prohibited from their operation of what is right.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When it happens to the restored limb the healing of crookedness and eminence at the broken bone and nodule, and it is fed up with the form of the limb, but the limb is not prohibited from its natural operation, then do not take the word of the one who examines that limb as though it is newly broken.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	But there are already many foolish doctors and restoratives who have done that in our land; and this operation is very blameworthy presenting great fear, the sign of which is deadly.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	But if the claudication and nodule are recent, then let them be embrocated with warm water in which soft herbs are steeped, like fennel and thistle roots, and marjoram, and similar to these; and let an ointment be made from a mild emulsion just like dill oil; or let it be plied with mallow juice and let it be bound up with linen, or with cotton, or with silk; or let it be bound with fat figures, and bound with dove's droppings, and similar to these of the medicines that are named consolida
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And some times it is dissolved by frequent gentle friction with the hands that are moistened, and let motion of the limb be administered in every direction at all hours.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	But if the crookedness has gone forward and is made strong and converted into stone and necessitates being cured with iron, then let the pus on top be dried up and the continuation of the bone be dissolved, and that which excesses of nodule of those doctors with the bone with thin saws, and let facility be administered in that with sollicitude and study.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter .23.
De sermo en dislocacio.	Of speech in dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is dislocation of one of the joints of its place so that it is prohibited from motion, and the figure of the limb is distorted, and it brings upon the patient great pains and injuries.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore when dislocation happens, then let it be reduced immediately, and not delay that reduction, for if it is delayed the joint is apostoamated and very soon with that dislocation is made difficult to reduce.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And for that reason let it not be struck nor stretched in the hour of apostoamatio, because many times it brings on spasms and pains to the patient.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	But when that happens, then let you pay attention to the apostoamatio of the patient, and then let it be left alone so that the apostoamatio rests; and then let the limb be embrocated with warm water and oil, and then let it be reduced gently.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And let every limb be cured by that of which the memory will come in its place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And now we have ordered the chapters of dislocation according to how it is preceded in fracture, from the uppermost part of the body down to the lowermost part.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter .24.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	Of the cure for dislocation of the lower jaw.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	So dislocated are the two jaws if not tight; and the dislocation of both is done according to one of two ways: they are pulled from their places by small movement, and are softened a little; or they are dislocated by entire dislocation and completed, so that they are softened at the joint where saliva runs from the patient's mouth and he cannot hold it closed, and his tongue is wrapped in his speech.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	But when its dislocation is small, then in the major dispositions it returns by itself for no reason.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	But if the dislocation is entire and completed, then let the reduction of it be administered gently, and not be delayed at all.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And let the minister hold the patient's head, and let the doctor insert his one hand's finger into the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, if the dislocation is on one side; or let him insert both hands simultaneously if the dislocation is on two sides, and the other fingers of his hands be outside holding them; and command the patient to stop clenching his jaws and open those at every part; and the doctor grip the jaw and press it so that it returns to its place.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if the reduction is difficult, especially if both mandibles are dislocated, then administer an evaporator with water and oil until both are reduced and do not delay the reduction of both at all, as we have said.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And when they are returned and bitten, and the mouth of the patient is closed and not relieved, then place a powder of cloth with cerot over them, made of wax and rosin oil; and then let it be bound gently with soft ligatures.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	Let the patient lie on his back, and let his head be held between two people so that he does not move to the right or left; and do not force him to chew anything for any reason; while his food should be minced lion meat, until the pains are reduced and the mandibles are swollen, then let him eat what he wants.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And this should be administered gently, and do not work on the opening of the mouth after eating and drinking and resting, until the mandible is swollen and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if the reduction of both mandibles is difficult when they are dislocated at any time and are not returned to their places, then many times afterward there occur feverish heat and constant vomiting, and very soon the patient's belly is inflated, and very soon he vomits pure bile.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you see this, then know that it is deadly; and many times the person who experiences this in seven days will die.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	On the reduction of dislocation of the furcula and the extremity of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The furcula is not dislocated within the chest by its connection to the feet; and sometimes it is dislocated outward at the end, and this is evident in sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And its restoration is that the patient lies on his back and extends his arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	Then press the area with your palm with a strong grip, for it will return.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	Then place on it plaster and powder and strengthen that.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	But the extremity of that which is joined to the collarbone and continued from it is not dislocated in any way; therefore, know that it should be reduced and bitten according to what we have said and according to what your appliances are.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	Then place on it plaster and powder and binding, and command the patient to adhere to tranquillity and rest until he is healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And with this method of treatment, the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	On the reduction of dislocation of the muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	Know that the muscle is dislocated only in three ways, of which one is that it is dislocated at the top of the joint at the lower end.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is that it is dislocated at the top of the muscle, and this occurs rarely; and it is not dislocated at the sides behind the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the front by the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And most commonly it is dislocated and protrudes outward at the lower end below the joint, especially in those whose flesh is thin; but in those who have much flesh, it is protruded outward with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And very soon happens to some people by blow or fall, and the muscle of it is apoplectic with apoplexy, and it is bitten by that which has already been dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Therefore, know this while you are above him, and then proceed with the cure of it.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And the dislocation of it is known when it is at the lower end below the joint; for you distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the intact muscle, for you observe among them a manifest difference; and you observe in the head of the muscle concavity and below the joint from the touch of the head of the muscle as if an egg, and to the patient you cannot reduce his hand to his ear, nor can he move it by any movements.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is dislocated above or below, and you then observe manifest touch, and it is not disguised.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And this dislocation is reduced easily when it is fresh and the patient is young.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And its reduction is that the minister raises the hand of him above; and then place your fingers below the joint of it, and raise the joint with strength above to its place, and the minister raises the hand of him, and extend it above; and then place it below so that it returns easily.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	But if it does not return by what we have said and so that the dislocation occurred, after many days, then know that the patient should be bathed in warm water and be administered a poultice to soften and loosen it as though his neck were frozen with frost, and fenugreek, and honey in water, and be administered.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	Then the patient should lie on his back and place his hand below the joint of it and wait in elevation and compression, and then the doctor places his foot on the ground, and lifts the head of the muscle with strength, and pulls the hand of the patient so that it is not bitten at the lower end, and another minister holds the head of the patient, which is not bitten at the lower end, for that returns to its place.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you wish, reduce it according to this manner: and there should be present a man who is longer than the patient, and he stands on that side, and inserts his muscle below the joint of the patient and lifts the joint of him above so that the patient is suspended in air, and another minister pulls the hand of the patient from the lower end of his belly.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	But if the patient is young, then know that it should be suspended with him for another cause, for its weight, for the dislocation returns at once.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And it is reduced similarly according to another manner: and there should be placed on the ground a pole long whose top is round in shape, like mortar, which is not thick nor fine, and then it should be placed below the patient; after he has been laid over the top of the pole, and the patient stands according to the length of the pole, and then his hand is extended from the lower end of the other part; and his body is extended on the other part with strength, for the joint returns to its place quickly.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if it is difficult to reduce it by all the causes that we have said, then use this cure: and take a pole whose quantity is in the length of two cubits, and its breadth is four digits, and its thickness is separated according to this form:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	Then on the round head are tied lions' clothes so that the pole does not bite the patient.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	Then it is placed below the joint of the patient, and its hand or arm is extended over the pole to the lower end, and the pole is tied over the helper and the arm and the extremity of the hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	Then the arm is placed over a rung of a ladder according to its breadth, and the hand is extended from the lower end, and his body is suspended on the other part, for the joint returns at once.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the instrument of it is completed according to each manner that is possible for you, and then know that you place below the joint a sponge of wool of equal quantity; and then place plaster prepared from powdered earth with rose oil over all the muscle, as it is rolled above, and then bind it from the lower end with binding decently; and the binding should be rolled over the plaster, and its hand be joined to his neck, and let him lie, and his hand not be bitten for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And that which is to be stopped, the food of the patient little, while the member is comforted, for it is more quickly healed.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And then the food should be given more frequently or water and exercise should be taken; and if it is stopped and not softened, then it is healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	But if the joint is dislocated many times by humidity that happens to it or for another cause, then in that case a cautery should be applied with three pricks, as is said before in the chapter of cauteries.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if all this is done and after seven days the ligament is not attached and the joint is not healed, and the plaster and compression are removed from it several times, and it is not healed, and he cannot raise that arm to the parts above, then know that his nerves which are at the head of the muscle, are cut or stretched or softened, and know that the joint will never be attached in its place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	Of the dislocation which is made of the foot and the breast or the parts behind, the reduction is made by impulse and extension with the hands, while it returns.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And the other compression should be administered on that one as it is healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if the healing happens with difficulty in that member and there is delay in its movement, then the patient should take a bath several times until that difficulty is relieved and it returns to its first nature.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter .XXVII.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	Of healing of dislocation of the collarbone.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	Know that the joint of the collarbone is dislocated with difficulty and returns likewise with difficulty; and it is dislocated to all sides, and most to the front side, and its dislocation is not hidden from you because when you adjust the dislocated collarbone with your hand, that is made manifest to you, for the joint is hollow and the arm cannot be bent, nor can it be touched with that one's own muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And that which is dislocated to the sides and you reduce the dislocation as soon as it comes to an abscess, for if it comes to an abscess, its reduction is difficult, and often it is not healed at all; and especially when it is to the back side, for it is the worst of all kinds of dislocations, and of greater pain, and many times death ensues from it.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And its restoration, when it is possible to reduce it, is that the hand of the patient be stretched with two hands, and the arm of the patient be expanded, and the hands of the doctor are on the collarbone and under it, and he presses the joint with the tips of his fingers or with the root of his palm until it returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	But if the dislocation is to the front side, then it returns as he bends his hand with his hand, while he strikes the collarbone with the root of his palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not obey reduction, then administer violent extension and great motion.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And it is that two ministers extend the arm, and they hold that joint in such a way that it is not moved because of the extension.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	And then the arm is to be rolled all around, as it is wrapped with folded cloth over the hand of the patient, or ligament.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, he anoints that with some oil in order that it be made smooth with facility; and then he presses the joint with violent impulse until it returns.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	And then its reduction should be stopped over that plaster in which it is stiffened and dried with egg white, and it is stretched with descending compression, and the arm is suspended from the neck, and is left for several days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And then it is released; and if the joint is formed in its place, then you release the ligament of it and leave that.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see the joint is not stronger, then you repeat the plaster and the ligament, and leave that for several days until it is stretched out; and then release that.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	But if it happens to it difficulty with the reduction of the joint and its disposition is in movement, then administer humection in a bath and subtle friction, and compression, until it is relieved; or pause over the joint all-healed, as it is a poultice of soft fat; and then release that, and leave it for the day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And then release that one, and put that in a bath; and when he rises, then you rub the joint with tempered friction, and then repeat over that all-healed, as it is a liniment of oil, once a day, and the second, and the third.
corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denolam intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	Corruption has already occurred to the brain due to the heat of the bath while it was wet.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you want, pause over that split of wet and hot cow's udder over it; and do that several times, for that is wet and returns to its disposition.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter .XXVIII.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	Of healing of dislocation of the ulna, which is of the joint that is between the arm and the hand.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	The hand sometimes is dislocated, and the reduction of its dislocation is easier, and the contrary is of the other joints, but however if there is swiftness in the reduction of it in the hour in which it is dislocated, before that the place becomes an abscess or an abscess occurs in it.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the reduction of its dislocation is that you stop the joint of the hand of the patient on a table and the minister extends the hand of that one, and the doctor stops his hand or his palm over the prominence of the joint, and he presses that until it returns to its place.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	But however if it is considered that the palm is already struck to the belly of the hand, then the patient stops his two hands on a table because of extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is before the two of the hand, then let the position of the hand of that be intriniceamment over the table, so that the hand of the doctor boxes over that prominence of the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And then if it returns at once, good; and if not, then strengthen that with plaster yielding the abscess and leave that; and do not repeat that, for if you do, you will not endure nor be able to reduce it further than you pass over it days.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	But however the joint is bent according to its tortuousness; and if the patient feels no cause but that the hand is softened and cannot be strengthened by any cause, then know that the nerves are cut or torn, and then there is no power in it except that it is tightened with cautery close to the break of it and strongly indeed that confers any cause.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	Then when the ulna is returned, then stop over it that plaster which we have recommended, and let it be left and tightened for five days; and then release that and let the hand of him be exercised.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	But if its movement is hindered and some difficulty occurs in it, then loosen that with lukewarm water and with friction several times, until it is relieved.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter .XXIX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	Of the healing of dislocation of the phalanges.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Sometimes the phalanges are dislocated all the way around.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when any phalanx of those is dislocated to the back of the palm or to its belly, then stop the phalanx and push the dislocation of it with your fingers, until it returns.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	And support the head of the finger, suspend that which is dislocated on both sides, and leave it for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	And then extend the dislocated part and straighten it on the same day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when night comes, take that second part according to the narrative, and do not cease from loosening it during the day, and exercise with movement, and do so for several days until it is stretched out straight.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And do the same if it is dislocated in the belly of the hand; take that part and do to it your first operation, until it is healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And likewise do for the other dislocated parts.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter 30
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	Of the cure of dislocation of the vertebrae of the back.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When a complete dislocation occurs to any of the vertebrae of the back or neck, and they are completely torn from their sockets, then in that case there is no cure, for death seizes the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	And the sign of this is that the ejection of the patient is outside of his will, and he cannot retain it; and many times some members of him are made soft, or two legs of him, or two arms of him, or one of those; or a vertebra is torn from its socket, for many times the removal of these is made to four parts.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Therefore it is torn from the back parts and is named dislocation.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	But the cure for this is that you should consider if the dislocation occurred due to fragility, because in that case there is no cure and there is no healing at all.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	But for that which comes from falling or hitting or similarly to those, the Ancients have already spoken of the methods of cure with a prolix speech, of which the most returns by profit; but I and briefly from that of which the few excuse the excess of it, by my proximity to my own intention and exposition, by which I have here exposed and formed from diverse instruments, by which I will show and space out that.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And I say that in dislocation which occurs from the front part in the feet, there is neither generation nor healing of that; and likewise in that which is made on both sides.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And of those there is no cure except for that which occurs specifically to the back with what I will now count.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And that the patient be extended on his face close to a wall, and be extended under him instrument wet so that he is not tied at the feet.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And then a straight stick be placed, fixt in the earth at the end of the bed around the head of him, and another stick in a line that extends his feet in the other extremity of the bed.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	And the minister hold the stick, and it should not be fixed in a hole; and another minister hold the other second in that form.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then wrap around the head of the patient and let the teeth of the lion clip under him; and extend the end of the clip to the stick which is supposed to be the head of him, and take that on him; and then tighten all the clips and take those on the other stick which is supposed to be the feet of him.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And then each minister extend the clip to the end of the stick, and let them not be torn from the two sticks and the clips of their sockets in which they are fixt, but on the contrary do not be fixed as I have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the doctor place his palms on the vertebra with strength within until he returns, or that he be placed over it a table, and then that he adjust his feet over the table within until he returns.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	But if he does not return by this form, then take a table of which the breadth or length is in line with three cubits, and dig in the wall from which we have said that it is proper to the patient a place in which to put between the end of the table.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And then place the middle of the table on the vertebra, and the doctor place his feet over the other end, and tighten be within until the vertebra is bound and returns to its socket.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you wish, open with a turn which is wound around the hand; and that you fix to the earth under the head of the patient at the end of the bed two sticks, the length of which is one cubit, and fix the head of him in the end of the bed winding two sticks; and let the length be between each stick one palm, and now it is made in each stick a hole in which to run torn, and each be set firm in earth so that it is not torn.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And let there be a round stick in which is the turn, and let it be wound around the two holes of the two sticks.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at the end of it is a hole in which is formed the stick, the length of which is one palm with that which is wound around; and likewise in the other two sticks.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then tighten the clips which you have tightened in the feet of the patient in the hole which is supposed to be the head of him, and the clips which you have tightened in his thighs in the turn which is supposed to be the feet of him.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And then each turn and stand a minister who twists the turn with his hand, and the doctor bends the vertebra according to what we have said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is the form of the turn:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And then when the vertebra is returned and the socket bent, then cover that you stop exciccatum plaster with oil, and then stop; and then pause over the plaster a board of which the breadth is three digits or around those, and the length of it is quantity that takes the place of the dislocation, and over the part of the vertebra.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And then let him be tied by the clip which we have said, and use the patient of subtle nourishment within until he is healed.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if any swelling remains in the socket at the end of the healing, then cover that they be administered medicines that moisten and loosen by administration of the board for a long time, which we have recounted; and now is administered in that socket sheet of lead.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And sometimes swelling occurs in the back of the neck, and it is caused by dislocation; and it is that bone which now swells so that it does not cover that be made projection on him with this medicine, for he will surely cause death to you.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31
De curacio de anca dislocada.	Of the cure of a dislocated hip.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	Know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle do not end only dislocation, and does not occur to those that occurs to other joints of small removal and concavity.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the joint of the hip is dislocated according to four ways, for it is dislocated to the parties within, or to the parties without, or to the parties before, or to the parties behind.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And most commonly it is dislocated to the parties within, and seldom to the parties before or to the parties behind.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	And the sign of its dislocation to the parties within is that when you bend the hip of the patient who has healed with the patient, it is longer and the joint is more prominent than that which has healed; and the patient cannot bend his foot because of the stretching, and it is the socket that the stretching has made apotemized from apothema cauterized, so that the head of the hip has been drawn here.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	The sign of that person to whom dislocation happens is that the parts are pushed out, it is that the accidents of him are contrary to this accident.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	The sign of that person to whom dislocation happens in front is that he expands his chest according to the compliment, but above all does not bend that part which is painful, and if he tries to go forward and cannot, and his urine is retained, and his testicles are swollen, and he must walk on tiptoe.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	The sign of that person to whom dislocation happens behind is that he does not expand the bottom, or cannot bend that part which bends the testicles, and his chest is shorter than the other, and the testicles are softened, and the head of the thigh is drawn towards that place.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	But the reduction of this dislocation is that you consider, according to time, if the dislocation is old and ancient, and has been long established with you, administering its reduction and remaining according to its disposition, then it will not be completely cured; and therefore no compression should be used upon it.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	But with the person who has the recent dislocation, and it is one of the four kinds of dislocations, then you should return to that which returns the joint and extend it to the parts within and without, and alternately to the right and left, for it quickly returns and does not require any other cure.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	But if it does not return in this manner, then you should prepare to extend the chest of him from the lower part, or with his own hands, or with a bandage which is tied above the chest; and another extends the hand of that one above the navel, so that he inserts his hands under the nipples of him; and another tightens with a bandage the root of the thigh, and holds the other end of the bandage.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And if you see that the dislocation is on the chest from the end of the chest, then you should cauterize that which is under the nipple of the breast; and it should be made to extend with a bandage of twisted wool from the cautery on the chest from the end of the bandage.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And it should be the extension of all those in one direction, so that the patient is elevated by his body from the earth and he remains hanging.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	And this species of extension is common to all four.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And therefore if the dislocation returns with what we have said, it will be good; and if not, then it is necessary in all species of that which I say about its own cure.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In its own reduction, when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is to the inner parts, then the patient should be laid on his back; and you should place the bandages over the root of the thigh in that place which is between the head of the thigh and the navel; and you should extend the bandage above the navel to the highest part of the breast.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And another minister should strongly take his arms and hold the large place of the patient's thigh, and extend it to the outer parts through violent extension, for that returns in its own place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this species is of the quickest cure by which that member is reduced, compared to the other species.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	But if it is excused from you and does not obey the entrance with this species of cure at all, then it should be bound by both feet of the patient together with strong bandages, quickly, above on both heels and above on both soles.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And the length of each of his parts should be the quantity of four digits, and the chest of the patient should be extended more than the other by the quantity of two digits.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And the patient should be suspended over the top of the post, and it should be in the middle; and its length from the earth should be the quantity of two arms.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And command a strong young man to lessen the head of the thigh, and another young man should be suspended by the patient, and the other young man lessening the thigh with strength should push, for the joint returns to its place with speed.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	But in the own reduction, when it is dislocated to the outer part, then the patient should lie on his back according to that which we have recommended in having gout; and the bandage should be tightened over the thigh of the patient properly and over his feet.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And two posts should be placed, one at his feet and the other at his head; and two posts adjusted to the middle of the mat which is placed over that upon which the patient is not damaged by the post being between his thighs, so that the extension to the lower parts is not drawn back.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And each minister should extend to his own part, and the doctor with his hand should draw out the reduction according to the art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Therefore, if you obey the reversal, it will be very good; and if not, pause over that diligently and as we have said in gout for that to draw out.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	But the patient should lie on his back quietly.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is to the front parts, then the chest should be extended slightly, and according to this measurement narration over mat; and the doctor places the palm of his right hand on the patient's navel, and another presses that with his other hand, and with that pressure he extends that to the lower parts to the navel.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	If the dislocation is in the parts behind, then it is not necessary that the patient be extended to the lower parts and elevated above the ground; rather, let him be laid on a hard surface, just as if the joint is dislocated to the outside parts, according to what we have said about the placement of the patient on two surfaces. And he should be on his back with his limbs extended, as we have said before.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And let there be applied a compression with a board over the place where the joint is located.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Now that the reduction is complete, and if you see the sign of it, then you shall extend two limbs on each side of the patient; and when you see those parts become equal, and the patient's limb externalized and expanded for some excuse, then know that the member according to which he is returned. Then adjust both thighs and apply plaster and bind with a bandage so that no joint is injured in any part. And let the patient remain at rest for three or four days.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	Then loosen the bandage and plaster, and compare one limb to the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	Now, if you see those parts equal in appearance, then know that the dislocation is already closed, and then let the patient go.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any cause for softening, then return and plaster that, and externalize it according to your first stretching, and let him remain in three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	Then loosen that, and let him delay walking on any leg for some days, until he is comforted.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter .xxxii.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	Of the cure of dislocation of the jaw.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The jaw is dislocated in three ways: it is dislocated to the outside parts, and to the inner parts, and to the lower parts most to the back parts; but not to the front parts.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of its dislocation is that you command the patient to apply his limb to his thigh; then know that the jaw is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of all its ways is that you make the patient bend his head straight down, so that he extends his limb if he can on that; adhere your two hands to his face, and let him put his foot between your feet; then let someone else adhere his jaw with their palms, and let them hold those between their fingers over his jaw with strength, and another servant extend his foot while the jaw returns to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And the sign of its reduction is that his limb adheres to the thigh with an easy non-laborious elevation.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Then plaster that and let the limb adhere to the thigh, and then tie those together with a bandage for three or four days, and then loosen them.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not use the patient of walking for some days, until he is healed and comforted.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	But if the reduction of it to you is excused, then administer strong extension with bands of which in the cure of the hip previous narration was made.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter .xxxiii.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	Of the cure of the dislocation of the ankle.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The ankle sometimes is dislocated by small removal, and sometimes it is dislocated according to accomplishment; and its dislocation is made either to the inner parts or to the outer parts.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the sign of its dislocation is that you see the ankle swollen proceeding to the part to which it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	But the cure of its removal is by easy reduction, and it should be extended with ease with hands and equalized while returning.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	But in its cure when it is dislocated according to accomplishment, let the patient bend his head straight down, and let there be one servant strong and valiant from the back part of that in the middle location of him.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	Then you with your right hand hold the foot from the highest part, and with your left hand from the lowest part of the foot in the location of the ankle.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	Then pull the foot to you with your right hand, and then with the left hand twice, and then extend with the left; and press the instep of the foot with the right towards the limb without labor.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And do that twice according to what we have counted.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	Then press the instep of the foot to the limb the third time, and you are at the ankle.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	Then if it returns in one time or two according to this manner, and if you see the foot equalized, it is good; but if not, then repeat the operation on him, for it will return.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	But if to you is prohibited the reduction of it with that which we have commanded, then let the patient lie on his back on the ground, and stretch a rope tightly on the ground beneath him, and let there be a cushion between his thighs, and you have wrapped a cloth over him so that he does not kick.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	Then the servant of him shall hold his thighs, and then another servant extend the foot with their hands or with band that lies on the neck of the foot; and then each servant shall extend against extension of his fellow, and the rope be extended between the thighs of the patient holding that so that the body of him is not drawn to the lower parts because of his extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	Then the doctor equalizes the dislocation with their hands, and another servant shall hold the healthy thigh to the lower parts, for the dislocation returns with ease.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	Then when the dislocation returns and you are made aware of the health of its reduction, then apply plaster and externalize that with strong bands, and bind the foot to the limb.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And if you fear or beware of the nerves which are behind on the ankle, so that the band over it is not violent and that does not lead him strongly.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	Then let him remain for two days or three; and if the band is softened, externalize that.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	Then loosen that on the third day or the fourth, and prohibit the patient of walking for 40 days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	But if he is forced to walk before that space, there is no security that the dislocation is not dissolved and ruined, and then that he does not receive cure.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if there happens to him pustule cautery, then let you administer in the healing of him that which in which our narration preceded, in another place of cure and of brooding, until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter .xxxiiii.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	Of the cure of dislocation of the toes of the feet.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	Let that which is dislocated be equalized with little extension without labor; and that which is difficult, then it is easier.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	But if the dislocation is in some knuckles of the neck of the foot, then let the patient bend his foot on even ground or on a table, and be standing as if he was walking.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	Then you stand on your feet, and put your foot on that which comes from the joints, and then press that with your foot with strength while it returns, and see that equalized and not prominent in the location.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	Then rest the belly of his foot on a table that takes all his foot, at which are two caps, and then externalize that with decent and firm stretching for three days; then loosen that and let him rest from walking for many days, until he is stretched out and healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter .xxxv.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	Of the species of dislocation that are done by plague or fracture or by any wound.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When you encounter one of those causes, and you persevere in the cure of it and in the restoration of the patient, many times death occurs.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And for that reason one should not be hasty in the treatment of the patient, but rather he who is wise in the art, with great compassion and pity, being tardy, not rash or presumptuous; and one must use in the beginning medicines that produce suppuration only slightly, and let the patient go to divine judgement, unless it be to him from whom one hopes salvation from destruction, for the alleviation of the illness, and in which some hope appears.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And therefore try at once to make the reduction of it at the beginning of the cause, before an abscess occurs.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And therefore if the limb returns as we desire, then administer treatment that will produce an abscess and cure the wound with those among the drying ointments that are appropriate for it.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if the dislocation is due to a fracture and it happens that in the bones there are separated pieces, then you persevere in their setting, and do in that case what we have said in the simple illnesses of that which precedes in the places of those.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And guard and avoid according to your ability that of the instrument in the ways of fear as you have been instructed by my preaching; for what is better for you, you owe to your Creator, and more permanent for your glory, and healthier for your true body those in your time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Thus end the words of Albucasim perfectly, of which may God be blessed.
Amen.	Amen.
