Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Thus begin the words of Al-Buqaqua.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	O sons, I have completed this book for you, which is the last part of medical science, because it follows its consequences, and for its explanations and descriptions, I consider that I have pleased you with this treatise, which is based on surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	Since surgery is practiced in our region and at all times, when it is greatly lacking, then the science of it remains; its traces are left; and a few small descriptions of it are found in the books of the Ancients, which change their interpretations and positions, to such an extent that they are closed and extended in force and art.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And I consider that I have given life to that with the arrangement of this treatise in that second way of explanation and description and abbreviation; and because it comes with the forms of instruments of cauterization and other tools of work by addition of description, and for preparation, which is necessary cause.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	May the cause for which a good artisan does not excel in his art in our time, is because the art of medicine is long, and he has to learn before all things the science of anatomy which connects Girdle within itself since it knows the spring of the limbs and their forms, and the connection and separation of them; and recognizes the bones, nerves, and ligaments, and their names, and the flexibility of them; and the pulsing veins and quiet veins, and places of sensation.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And therefore say I that "hypocrisy" which is a name in itself, makes small work and more in the art of surgery.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	May we have already said in the entrance of this book; for who does not know that I have told you about anatomy, it is not evident that he does not fall into error and cause the death of men, so many times as I have seen such ones formed in this science, and having gotten themselves from that science and those experiments.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	For I saw a doctor who had fallen ill and experienced an ulcerous abscess in the neck of a woman, and he cut some arteries of the neck flowing with much blood until the woman died between his hands.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And I saw another doctor who thought that he had swallowed something in his stomach, which was large, and went to him and removed that thing with a piece of the bladder, so that that man died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And I have already called for him to be removed, and I saw that by the size of the thing and the position of the patient that he would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And I saw another doctor who took a fee from a duke of our land for surgery, and he put him in a black cast that was broken in his crotch; and prepared the doctor because of his ignorance, removed the fracture on the skin, with needles and threads to tighten it, and did not leave the skin breath.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	Then he removed it according to his desires, and then he prayed, and then he left it with some days and ordered us to remove the bandage; and thus, within that time, the crotch and foot were broken, and came to ruin.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And I was called for him, and I prepared to remove the bandage, and with success there was peace and relief of their pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	But the corruption had already been confirmed in the member, so that he could not restrain it, and did not stop walking the corruption in the member until the patient died.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And I saw another doctor who had pierced a cancerous abscess and became ulcerated in some days, within which the evil of it spread to his lord.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	For this reason is because the hot water is pure of melancholic humor; therefore, it does not cover that it should come to you with fire of all, but that it is a member which you suffer that of all comes to you.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And therefore, sons, it is necessary for you that the surgery of the ma be divided into two operations: one in an operation to which health is associated, and a work in which danger is present in the greatest dispositions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And I have already done that in all places of this book where surgery is performed in which it is error and fear; therefore it is necessary for you to keep that away from you and not open it, so that the pages do not rob you of your way to speak and confuse you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And therefore take your arms with diligence and protection of God, and your misfortunes with help and constancy.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best way by the grace of God, and achieve salvation and worthy succession, and keep your terrible misfortunes of difficult healing, and put your weapons away from where you are afraid, lest it be lost in your faith and in your name; because there remains to you to glorify, and then go into the monastery and behind your sanctities.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Guiliam I said: "In a few months, I will leave this world, and my soul will not be in this place."
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	Don't put bad medicine; because you don't know where you are going.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And I have divided this book according to three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Begin the division of the book, and first of the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter ordered by the head, in the forms of instruments and tools of cauterization, and from that which is necessary in the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter, of cutting and piercing, and of vacuums, and of blisters, and of extraction of arrows and of the same things applied to those, is well divided and ordered by the forms of instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	The division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, of restoration and dislocation, and of cure for injury and of the same things applied to those; is well divided by the head, in the forms of instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	Of cauterization by fire and by acute medicine and recollection of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	At that beginning begins the treatise of all the book.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	I will tell you the quality of the healing things of that cauterization and of the dangerous things of it, and in what combination it should be forbidden.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore I say that the speech of the quality of the healing thing of cauterization and of the dangerous thing of it is long and prolix, subtle by science, and hidden away; and from it to speak a great multitude of wisdom, and from it I agree, and for me it is enough with a small part of their speeches, threatening length.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And therefore I say that cauterization brings together all the combinations universally, which is made of one substance or another; except two combinations, which are combinations of half and half substances.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the combination of dry and half-dry substances, there is a disagreement; for some say that cauterization is helpful to that, and others say the opposite, that cauterization is not suitable for dry and dry diseases which are quality and dryness, because the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is not suitable for disease that is dry and dry to be cured.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And he who says that opposite of this is true, that by cauterization it is made to heal in all kinds of malady and dry that comes out in men's bodies, because when you compare the man's body with the fire's humidity, the man's body becomes wet.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I say by the speech of that person, which I have already experienced some times and discovered it myself.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	But nevertheless I do not cover that it comes upon this one what already has been exploited and exercised in the chapter of cauterization by later exercise, and knows the diversity of the man' complexions and the dispositions of the illnesses in their methexes, and the causes of those, and the accident of their, and the space of the time of those.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	But in the other complexions, it is not upon you a fear, and more in the dry and wet illnesses, because all the illnesses are agreed about them, and they are not agreed in the healing by cauterization of those ones.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And you know, children, that of the secret of healing by cauterization by fire and of its goodness, it is upon cauterization with medicine that burns, because the fire is simple, the action of which does not reach except to the member which is cauterized and does not harm the other member by small damage.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	But the action of burning medicine reaches to that in the members which it makes dry, and hard it brings about pain in the ill member which is difficult to heal and hard to endure.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	But the fire, by its smallness and by its substance goodness, does not make it but that it is superfluous; And I have already known it through experience and through length of service in studying about truth of causes; and for this one I am excused from the length of the speech And if it were not that it is not read to you secretly because I am afraid, the quality of the operation of it in the bodies and its expelling by which it expels the illnesses, would be made clear through philosophical demonstration, which would serve to sharpen your wits.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And you know, children, that the seasons are opposite for the time when it is convenient to make cauterization and pause the best time of spring.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And I say that cauterization is convenient at all times, so that the damage by the accident of time is submerged in the healing power of this one which is made to come out by cauterization, and more if the cauterization is for pains or necessary pains, hard and sharp, which do not suffer delay because it is feared from those who bring about evil, which is greater than small damage entering by the time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And thus you shall not judge in your wits, or children, this one is not considered but the common people and the foolish illnesses, so it is that to that illness which is healed by cauterization is convenient at all times, and pause that consequence.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the cause is not good like this one where they are concerned by it, because cauterization is only in place of medicine which changes the complexion and dries the humidities which are the cause from which pains come.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	But nevertheless cauterization on medicine by impulsiveness of its goodness and the excellence of its operation and greatness of its lordship.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	And it is possible that the illness which has been administered to it by cauterization returns in some hour of the time, according to the complexion of the patient and the location of his illness, and the goodness of it; and because it is prepared in its bodies by addition of superfluities to it, and because it is obtained from it in its acquisition in foods and resemblances of those causes; but if the illness for which cauterization was administered is a subtle one in some member of few superfluities and humidities, then by cauterization of teeth because of pain and resembling that, it is possible that in it does not return that pain, but comes little.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	And but a vulgar speech is that cauterization is the last medicine remedy, and it is an unjust speech to those who understand it in it, because I think that it is not a healing that profits from medicine or any other cause, but by cauterization.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the cause is opposite to that; and I think that cauterization is the last medicine remedy only when we administer the ways of healing in some illnesses, and those medicines do not provide, but at the end of the cause we administer to it by cauterization, and profit from it.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And then I say that cauterization is the last medicine remedy, not according to the speech which I understand from the common people and foolish illnesses.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And they said that cauterization in gold is better than cauterization in iron, and did not say this one but because of the equality of the gold and its smallness.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they said that the place of cauterization does not make it break, because I have already seen and touched that it does not do this one but in some members which have others, and cauterization with fire is good and better than cauterization with iron as they said; but when you make cauterization with gold by fire, it is not known to you, because it is made according to the quantity that you want for the roughness of the gold, and because it prepares to receive it; and if you put on it without noticing, it melts the gold into the fire, and case in the fire some sheets so that the artisan works hard with it because of its occupation.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And by it is made cauterization with iron, we must put it gently and carefully to the right operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have already ordered this chapter in cauterization according to the other chapters, and I have ordered those of the book within the pages, so that you ask this one what it wants from it.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	Of cauterization for headache by cold and humidity.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cauterization confers to humidity and cold on the servile accident of which there are two causes, so it is a cause of soda and many types of flux raumatic, called corissa, from the head to the parts of the arms and ears flowing, and many types of sleeping, and toothache and gumache, and generally all kinds of illness that come because of coldness.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cauterization is this one, that first you command to the patient which is made to come out by lacative medicine on his head pronouncing, for three or four nights, according to whether you demand the goodness of the patient and his age and his usual clothing.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then you command him to shave his head with a razor, and then he sits between your legs on a bench and puts his hands on the top of his feet.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then you put the edge of your hand on the side of his nose between his ears.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	But nevertheless, when this one tells about the place where it is coming from, it signs that place by trial, and then makes this cauterization which is made in this way:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And then you put it on the place gently, in a way that it descends, and by which the patient's hand is forced little by little, and you turn it.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And then you lift your hand gently and look at the place, and if you see already some quantity of hair from the head, as well as the amount of dirt that it has on it, then you raise your hand, and if it does not turn to iron, then from another one, because it is cold, before it turns out to be hair which I have told you.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then you take a little salt and dissolve it on the place and leave it there for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And place it on the cot hidden in the border, and leave that one on the inside which is destroyed by fire.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And cure that wound with fourfold bitter medicine until it is healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And they say that when the Roman plague broke out, so too did the barley, for it is better and more nourishing.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And they say that it should be cauterized within the bone itself, and that it should retain the cautery within so that a part of the bone's surface is burned.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	Then have it shaved that is close to the bone, then heal it.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And others say that the cautery should reach the back of the bone, firmly pressing it within so that the bone does not break, and this is the way to cut a small piece off:
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	They estimate from that location the vapors from the head.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And it should be kept open for a long time, and then heal within so that it hardens.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	Perhaps I do not see these two types of cauterization as much, but rather in some cases out of fear; and leave that one to be better for it is the salvation, when it is so; because the head is a part of continued movement, especially when the head of the patient is fevered.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the first type of cauterization is more saved and better in my opinion; and from that one, I do this work to save it, and then heal.
Capitol segon.	Second.
Del cauteri del cap.	Of the head cauterization.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When in total the head causes chronic and long-lasting pain and water is present in the patient for a long time, and uses of scatters and poultices and calques and ointments and plasters and balms and other things, and especially if the head has already been cauterized with another cautery, then consider that because the head is of strong creation in its nature; and it does not cause great harm or damage, then cauterize it again with a little bit of another cautery.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	Then cauterize that one on the corner of his head with a cauterizer within so that the bone is broken.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Then cut the bone and uncover it from the quantity that we have counted, and cauterize that one in the back of the head at the location called "vas" — and that is the place where wind blows.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And praise your mother in such, and do not uncover the bone, for the patient's water causes great pain different from the pain of all the other head cauterizations.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And you should direct this cauterization to its location, for because the cautery with which the head's corners are cauterized is less subtle than that with which the crown of the head is cauterized, and this is the way of it.
Capitol ters.	Second.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	Of cauterization of the emigre who has not been ancient.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When the pain at the back of the head is hard, or there is a painful pressure within the ear, have the head emptied by medicine, and administered to it the other cure, which I spoke of in the various types of illnesses; and if that does not help, then cauterize it with burning and iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	Perhaps cauterizing with burning medicine is better than taking an ale of honey, and scorching that one and rubbing the ends of both sides of the head.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	Then cut the location of the pain in the temple with a sharp needle within so that it reaches its hidden location, then keep it covered.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	Then press tightly over it with a constricting bandage, and leave it for three hours; then pour the honey, and leave the plague for two or three days, and place it on the cot hidden in the border, so that the area hardens.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then heal that one with cold medicine until it is healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you have them, prepare some of the burning medicines that I wrote in the second medical treatise.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	Perhaps cauterizing with iron according to this method:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	and it is called a small wedge, because the head has such a form in which there is a slight curvature, and in its middle is a little prominence.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	Then place it on the location of the pain, and hold your hand back — so that the iron does not burn the skin which is left behind — and turn the small iron quickly.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the amount of skin that is removed by the edge of the bone is about a quarter of it, and raise your hand up so that the artery is not removed from the part which is left behind, so that blood does not flow out freely.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then wrap the cot in salt water and place it on the location, and leave it for three days; then remove the wrapped part from the border, and heal it with cold medicine until it is healed.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you see it, cauterize at the end of the knife according to the cauterization method, and be careful not to cut the artery in this emigrant who has not been ancient.
Capitol quart.	Fourth.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	Of cauterization of the ancient emigrant.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you treat the ancient emigrant with the water that we have spoken of in the previous cure, and with the water that we have spoken of in the various types of illnesses, and if that does not help, and sometimes because of the illness itself which does not contain enough water for the first cauterization with medicine or fire, then consider that you ignite the cauterizing knife within so that it whitenizes, because it signifies over the location of the pain with a long line from which most of it comes, or that one; and place your hand back for a second time, and tightly hold the small iron and turn it quickly.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, you must be careful not to damage the continuation of the jaw, which is very important for chewing, and that the tongue is not removed, and that it does not become paralyzed; and that a spasm does not occur.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if you are careful about the flow of blood from the artery which is cut off, because when one cuts it, there is a fear, and more so than that which does not know how water flows and does not study it and does not expect it; then leave the operation on the patient at the beginning.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And I come back to the memory of the regiment of the accidental flow of blood from the iron according to its method, in its location of freedom.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if this illness does not help that type of cauterization, and the patient can tolerate it, then heal the plague within so that it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you see it, administer the cauterization which we spoke of in the second part of the iron method using two knives, and it is better cauterization and more certain.
Capitol .v.	First.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	Of cauterization of the pain of the ears.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When the ear hurts because it is scratched and the pain is treated with soothing medicines and the other cure which I spoke of in the division, and if the pain does not come back, then burn the cauterization, and this is the one that has no precise point, and this is the way:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	Then place the point of the knife close to the ignition, and direct it towards the entire ear as it is rolled over, or around each semiluna if the pain is in any one of them.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Along with the knife' edge along the ear slowly and carefully, so that you do not hurt the location with trying to touch it.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the cautery must make points all around the foot, and then bring it up, and appropriately heal the wounds that are there so they can be healed.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	On the Cauterization of Scurvy.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	Scurvy is cured and cauterized with spices that come through the blood, as we have said in the division of scurvy diseases.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cauterizing with a spice that comes through drought or spasm of the nerve.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you treat that species of scurvy with poultices and calms and gulping, and do not confer your cure, then consider that you cauterize the patient with three cauterizations: the first on the ear, and the second a small cauterization on the thigh, and the third on the union of two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And pause the small cauterization for the opposite of the scurvy departure, for softening does not happen except in the part that is healthy and whole.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	And the form of cauterization is that you cauterize it with the cauterization on the right side of the tip of the ear, placing a small one on top of the hairline, and in the thigh, whose length should be according to the length of the said poultice, and pause your hand so that the quantity of the spice is burned up by half.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the form of the cauterization, which is especially for the knife, the shape of which is placed before you.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	But even more it is that this one little bit also comes to its ends; and consider that the knife does not cut in vain a little.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And then heal the wounds with water that is before it is healed so that they can be healed.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	On the Cauterization of Old Apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When old apoplexy is and you do not confer your medicine to the patient or there is no fever, then cauterize it with four cauterizations: on all the hairlines of his head; and on the cauterization and the middle place of his head, as we have said; and on the chin.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the way to do the cauterization is to do it according to what has been said before.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And then it is cauterized on top of the stomach's mouth; and more so; and it should be carefully healed with water that you heal before.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	On the Cauterization of Oblivion Caused by Flame.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	Then give the patient in the beginning large poultices and pills with the servant shouting.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	And then shave all of the patient's head and place it on his chest, covered by a cloth described in the book about plasters.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And pause that one for a few moments, for that is a way to cauterize.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And make water according to the order that we have said before.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And thus if by that one it is healed well; and otherwise, then do three cauterizations on the back part of his head, which are sent down from the top-most part of the head to the back part within the hairline.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And pause between each cauterization the thickness of the said water, and appropriately heal the cauterization with water that is proceeding.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	But if you add to the patient water they can bear, then do the cauterization in the middle place; and if you have added more, then cauterize it on top of the hairline on either side.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	And appropriately heal that one within so that it can be healed; and make the olive-shaped cauterization according to the form that was placed before you.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	On the Cauterization of Paralysis and Softening of the Whole Body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	Then process in the head's healing with poultices and water that we have said; and shave the patient' s head, and cauterize it in the middle place of the head, and on all the hairlines, and on the back part of the head, and on the three places of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the softening of the body to those who can bear it and the disease is strong, then cauterize that one with four cauterizations on the back places, and most importantly make the hand hot so that the spice is burned up by half, and hold it.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	And then heal that one within so that it can be healed, and this one is olive-shaped cauterization.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	On the Cauterization of Epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	It is not cauterized with epilepsy, but this one is caused by the blood.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	Then give the patient a strong poultice to begin with and another cure that we have said in the division when the disease is great and the patient can bear the experience of medicines.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it is a child who does not suffer the medicines, then administer gulping and chewing with the servant healing, before water for two days, with the good-tasting food.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	And then shave the patient' s head, and cauterize it with one cauterization in the middle place of the head according to the previous way, and another cauterization on the top of the head, and on each hairline; and cauterize the patient' s skull.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is strong and can bear it, then cauterize that one with all the mentioned cauterizations, in having paralysis and softening of the body on the spine of the neck and back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And make olive-shaped cauterization according to what has been said before.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	But if the patient is a child, then pause with a small cauterization according to this way.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	On the Cauterization of Melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupt blood and gross flame, then cauterize that one with all the cauterizations that we have said when in having paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is excess flowing to melancholy, and the patient' s body is moist, then give that one water to heal the brain according to the water that has preceded in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	And then shave the patient' s head, and then make it red with a poultice placed on top of the circle, and then pause that one in the middle place of the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And the patient may be given six cauterizations, and it is held by all parts.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And then pause with a ointment; and it is more worthy to go before sheep-shearing.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And burn that one over the fire by warm heat according to measure, which tells him when it is too hot or not hot enough.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	And then put that one in the middle place of the head on the circle, and let it rest so that it cools down.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And make water with the patient once a week and give him the other cure that we have said or, if you prefer, cauterize that one with very small points according to what is most appropriate for him: this is a special way of cauterizing that wets the brain with equality.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	And then pause that one that is red in sheep-shearing or gray-blue.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	On the Cauterization of Descending Water in the Vein.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When you hear the beginning of water in the vein by the signs that we have said in the division, then begin and give the patient water to heal his head, and keep that water from all moisture.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And make this man's bath in water for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	Then order him to shave his head, and cauterize this man's scalp; then cauterize this man's two temples with two cauterizes if it is the beginning of water in two holes, or a single cauterization if it is the beginning of water in one hole.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Then cut with a cauterizer all the veins and arteries that remain tied up; and let the cauterizes be in that length in the latitude of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And beware of any bleeding from the cauterization; and if there is any bleeding from him, stop it with some medicine, which is at your disposal.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And I will bring you a wisdom that is in the extraction of veins and in the absolution of those, and beware of any bleeding from him.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And some veins are cauterized in his neck with two cauterizes that run along the bones.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	Of the Cauterization of Ancient Tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When the tears of the eyes are ancient and dry, flowing through the veins and arteries that are in the prominent place of the head, and it is seen that they are superfluitatio fluxs of phlegm, then cauterize this man with a cauterizer that we have described in the beginning of water flowing into holes, and cauterize this man's scalp with one cauterization, and two cauterizes on each temple, and two cauterizes at the base of the neck where the bones are.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if you want to add more, then cauterize this man' entire jawbone at the base of the skull, on the outside edge of the ear, with a small cauterization.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	Of the Cauterization of the Smell from the Nose.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you treat this man with water that we have described in the division and do not profit from your treatment, then prepare three cups of wine for the patient to drink; and then cut his hair short, and cauterize him half with a cauterizer and the other half with an olive cauterizer.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	Then cauterize this man with a garlic cauterizer on each of his two ears, leaving the hair a little short.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And beware of any burning that you do not set it on fire.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And this is the form of the garlic cauterizer.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	Of the Cauterization of the Softening of the Eyelids of the Eyes.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the eye is softened by disease or moisture, then cauterize it with a cauterizer shaped like this moon; and this is how to do it:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you want to, then cut his hair short on both sides of the face with two cauterizes, and make them long from the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And let the length of each cauterizer be according to the amount of the eyebrow.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	Do not squeeze your hand too much with the cauterizer, according to the quantity that a third of the eyelid is softened.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	Of the Cauterization of the Eyelid of the Eye When the Hair Turns to the Inside and Sticks to the Eye.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the hair of the eye turns to the inside and sticks to it, cauterize it in two ways: either with fire or with burning medicine.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If your cauterizer has fire, order the patient to look up at the sky where the hair will burn off, extending and twisting it; and if it sticks, then tie the eyelids tightly with a cloth so that he does not hurt himself.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Then tie the hair tightly and twist it, then pause the patient's head on his shoulder, and put a seal on his eyelid with a ring, which is according to the figure of a sword, and this is the beginning of the seal near the hair.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	Then put an egg in white wine or a grape juice on the eyelid.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	Then ignite the cauterizer, and this is the form of it:
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And then cauterize on the shape that you have described, little by little, making it look like a fire of thyme, completely burning the surface of the hair, which is thus, as it were, surrounded by a sword of oak.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	The seal of health for this work is that you see the eyelids of the eyes already contracted and the hair of the eyes lifted by the cauterization.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	Then lift your hand up and hold it like this for three days, then put it down on the egg white or grape juice.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that man with oil within, so that he is healed.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	But if for some reason the hair turns to the inside and the eyelid is softened again, then make the cauterization again after the first one.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	But if the hair is in the eyelid below, then cauterize it so that it rises to its natural place and does not stick to the eye; and may the hair not touch the eyelid.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	But your cauterizer has burning medicine; command the patient to look up at the sky where the hair will burn off, extending and twisting it; and may it be bound with a cloth so that he does not hurt himself. And may the shape of the cauterizer be like a fire of thyme.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. .i., o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	Then take care to clean and prepare your instruments, and let your hands be ready for the work. Chapter XVIII. Take care to clean and prepare your instruments, and let your hands be ready for the work. Then mix those two causes together, and make a paste of it so that it is not dried out; and then spread the paste on the cloth in the form of a fire of thyme, and put it on one side of the eye; and put the other eye on the other side; and pause the patient' head on his shoulder; and put an egg in white wine or grape juice on the eyelid.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	Then pause it on the medicine and hold it for a little while; and do not squeeze your hand too much with the medicine, according to the amount that the patient feels the burning of the medicine, for the burning is in his eye.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	Then when you see that the medicine has a bitter taste, then let it rest and wash your hand with water; and then consider whether the eyelid has been raised already by itself when it was washed, as it should be; and if not, return to the medicine on the spot where it has not been wet, for it will not harm you; and if it is too hot or too cold, make a mixture of it with water.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	Then put it down on the edge of the cloth where the hair has been cut off, so that it is removed from the irritation, then treat that man with oil within or another medicine, so that he is healed.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	You must be vigilant in your work so that the medicine does not get into the eye, and if the hair sticks to the eyelid, then repeat your medicine on that spot where it has been softened, and properly there, as it begins, put an egg white or another medicine to be healed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is the form of thyme.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	You should know that the eyelids of men vary according to their size and age. And so, according to water, your remedy will be prepared.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And do not hide the way to make this remedy from those who study it in this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	On the Cauterization of a Fistula that is in the Lacrimal of the Eye.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you treat a fistula that has been mentioned in the division of the thighs and do not confer with your treatment, then consider that you cauterize it according to this method: command the patient to keep their head still on the table, and have a minister hold their head some distance between their thighs so that it is neither disturbed nor agitated by the patient's head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And then put a warm wax or a paste of wool on the patient's neck.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	Then light the cauterization from which this form is made:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	which is concave, thus with a curved end or a pointed end, from one end of which the cauterization is made.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if it goes in, let it penetrate to the other end.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you want it to go out thus with an effort.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	However, the concave one is better for the work of the hand.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And then press on the fistula if it is open, and clean and dries it up.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not open, then open it and extract the pus from it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	Then put the cauterization on it which is well lit, and at the same time place the patient' hand or the servant' hand on the side of the nose, so that the patient' hand or servant' hand does not feel the heat of the cauterization, and then put the cauterization on the root of the nose and corrode it.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And if at the beginning of the hand' cauterization it penetrates into the bone, it is good; and if not, then repeat the cauterization one or two times, if necessary, and leave it alone for three days, and then put a paste of oil on it around and inside to dry up so that it heals.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	However, if it has not healed in eleven days, then put on it an acute corrosive medicine and cut it according to what you have said in the patient' chapter.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And another way of cauterizing a fistula that they first mentioned: Go to the site of the fistula and then pierce it and put in it an amount of molten lead; and let your hand be over it, and do not let the lead reach the patient' neck so that it burns the fistula, and then consider that you have cauterized it and dried it up with incredible healing.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed with water that we have mentioned in the cauterization and treatment, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to administer a trumpet from the nose and reduce the fistula to its root according to what will come out at its own place.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVII.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	On the Cauterization of a Cut or Wound on the Skin.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	It often happens that wounds or cuts appear on the lips, and most often on the lips of children.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Therefore, when you treat those wounds or cuts with water that we have mentioned in the division of the parts and do not confer with your treatment, then consider that you cauterize them thus:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	Is it in its cavity according to the subtlety of a knife blade.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Then put that well-sharpened knife into those wounds so that the cauterization reaches the edge of the wound.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	Then heal it with cerume so that it heals.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	On the Cauterization of a Fistula in the Mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When there is a boil in the soft palate or the hard palate or the teeth, it bursts and bleeds, and then it is broken and raw, and then it forms a fistula, and you do not confer with your treatment, then consider that you ignite the cauterization according to the quantity that is received in the fistula, and then put that burning cauterization on the root of the fistula, and at the back of it make it burn so that it reaches the edge of the fire on the edge of it, and once or twice more; and then heal it with water that we have mentioned in treatment so that it heals.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And if the healing has dried up and it has healed, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to expose the site and remove the bone according to what will come out at its own place.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	On the Cauterization of Teeth and Softening of Veins.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the veins are softened by moisture and the teeth are loose, treat them with medicine and do not confer, then consider that you place the head of the patient on the table, and then put the tip of your hand over the vein so that it does not reach the patient' hand, and immediately put the fire-lit cauterization into the tooth, quickly; and let your hand be over the patient' hand so that the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	Then remove your hand, and then repeat the cauterization a few times according to what you want.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	Then place the patient' mouth in a bowl of salty water and hold it for an hour, and then wash it out, because the loose tooth is stuck and the softened gum is tightened and the corrupting moisture is dried up.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	On the Cauterization of Toothache.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When toothache is caused by cold or heat, or it does not confer with treatment by medicine, then cauterize it on the edge of a cow or fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Cauterization on the edge is that you take cow's blood and boil it, and then put a knife blade in it, and then wrap it around the end of the tooth, and quickly put the boiled blood on the tooth until it is heated.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	Then repeat that cauterization a few times within which the virtue of fire reaches the edge of the teeth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you see it, dip wool or a knife in the blood, and put it on the tooth, and then put a burning knife into its cavity.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	However, the cauterization by fire is that you attend to the whetstone of iron or of steel, and it is in the center of it with some thickness, and the acuity of the fire does not reach the patient' mouth.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	Then light the cauterization according to its form, and then put it on the tooth, and let your hand be over it so that the cauterization is heated; and make water a few times because the pain remains or on this day or on another day.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	Then consider that by the power of that fire, which the patient holds in his mouth with good edge, it keeps it for an hour and then washes it out, and this is the form of the cauterization.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	Cauterize it according to what you see fit, as it is possible for you.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the form of the tube:
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	On the Cauterization of an Extropulum.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When the extrophulus is made of slimy or fluid humors that are not obedient to medicine by swallowing, and you see the digestion of them slightly, then consider that you light the cauterization which is concave in form, having two open ends so that the smoke reaches the other end, and put it on the swelling a few times, and then consider that you put the burning cauterization on one end of the swelling, and then put it on the other end so that it burns; and then heal it with water that we have mentioned in treatment so that it heals.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the abscess is small, then pause the cauterization according to the quantity of the abscess, and let it rest for three days and pause over it in the border inside until it has healed so that the fire has burned it up.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	Then clean those wounds and bandage them well until they are cured.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And the shape of the tube or the cautery is such that it can be turned.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter. XXIII.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	Of cauterization for warts and constriction of the bile.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When the humidities come upon the throat of the lung, and mostly when the air is cold in temperature, then it is customarily said that the patient should be evacuated at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize that place where the gumma is lodged.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And beware that you do not apply the cauterization to the gumma or burn with the fire of the patient's throat, but only a little bit.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And cauterize that which needs to be cauterized again at the joint of the collar at the last vertebra of the neck.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	The patient should be laid on his side, with his head turned so that it faces the fire.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	Then clean those wounds which have come before them until they are cured.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter. XXIV.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	Of the cauterization for lung rash and coughing.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When the cough and lung rash are due to humidities that do not cause fever or a tickling, and they are old rashes, then cauterize those two places on the furculum at the lodged places, and another place on the middle of the foot between two breasts; and let it be the clavified cauterization according to the preceding form.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, your cauterization may be pointed like the one called "puncta," whose form you follow in the case of pain in the ears.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And let there be points within those; and clean those wounds which have come before them until they are cured.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And now the cauterization is done with three ramps, because there are three kinds of cauterization, which are done according to this form:
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter. XXV.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	Of the cauterization for tickling, which is at the tip of the tongue.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the tip of the tongue is dislocated by slippery humidities and does not return to its place in an hour from its falling away, then reduce the dislocation first, and then turn the patient over on his back; and if it has fallen away to one side, then raise the leg which is at the tip of the tongue to that side, and lift the heel to the other side. And if the dislocation has fallen to both sides, then raise the heels together.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And you should have two ramps for the fire; and this is their form:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	Then cauterize the tongue within that which has fallen away within, and that which is to the other side of it; and this is the form of the two ramps:
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	and then that small one according to the quantity of the tickling; and this is their form:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	In some cases, it is adjusted according to this count, and for that reason are these the cauterizations. VIII.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	Then pause the fire above the cauterization point with salt, and then quickly make it adhere to rest, and let the member not be troubled by any pain until it is comforted.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is to the inside, and then it has fallen away again, then cauterize over the muscle with a pointed cauterization, or with a tickling one, because the joint is confirmed and the moisture is slippery, and the patient is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter. XXVI.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	Of the cauterization for the stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When the stomach is coming out with fluid and the liquid is multiplying within it, and if you continue the ways of treatment and do not confirm it, then it is customarily said that the patient should be turned on his back, and extend your hands and your cushions, and then cauterize those three places: one place at the foot of the leg, for the quantity of a finger with a pointed cauterization, and two places at the sides of the feet of the leg, within the triangular form; and lengthen between those which are not adjusted so that they will be joined together.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cauterization is the quantity of the two thirds of the thickness of the tongue.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And be the shape of the cauterization according to this form, six additions, And if you wish, cauterize with one large cauterization in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and this is the form of a circle according to this form:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And cauterize the stomach pointedly at that which is frightened by this cauterization: and it is because you feel about the stomach with the quantity which you wish to feel, and then cauterize those points; and then clean those wounds which have come before them until they are cured.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter. XXVII.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	Of the cauterization for a fretted hand.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When pain in the hand comes from cold or moisture or great wind within it, and if it is getting away from its normal position by an excessive exit, then it is customarily said that the patient should be turned on his back, and feel about the hand with the quantity which you wish to feel, and then cauterize those three places according to this form: one place at the back of the hand above the knuckle, another between the two knuckles, and another between the knuckles and the wrist; and pass a little liquid on the surface of the hand.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And be the space between each cauterization according to the thickness of the finger, and be the cauterization according to the length of the right hand.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not apply the cauterization with a pointed instrument.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the quantity of water that has been added is more than half of the thickness of the tongue, and it is not adjusted again; and if the patient is lying on his back; and if he is not, then be sitting down, which already has extended its cushions, and raise its brasses.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cauterization:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	You are able to cauterize those places with a tickling cauterization when you have subtlety and prudence in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And beware that you do not process too much in the cauterization, and let the thickness of all the tongue be added so that it reaches within the bowels, because the tongue here is thin; and know how to apply it.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter. XXVIII.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	Of the piercing of an abscess in the hand by cauterization.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When there is excitement or an abscess in the hand, and you wish to know whether that abscess is in the flesh of the hand or in the skin of it, then if it is in the flesh of the hand, the patient will have a strong pain which will increase;
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	Then if it is in the skin of the hand, the pain will be very strong and often trouble your medicine.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Then turn the patient over on his back, and feel about the place of the abscess; and then apply the cauterization which has been described before in this book.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And cauterize with that and cauterize within so that all the tongue is combined, within so that it reaches to the bottom, within so that it is healed in a fire.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And so you cure this one by curing the other pustules until it is healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And so you should not use this form of cauterization except for the one in which the study in the art of medicine is extended, and in whose case many bad diseases have been known; but some have experiented a little about it on this operation, but more you must not do so, and it is better.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter .xxix.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	On Cauterization of Wounds
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	They said that the ancient cauterization of wounds with a hot iron according to this method is useful, and it is this that you take from the hot iron of Aristotle's long dry hair, and that of its thickness.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	And submerge that one in oil and dip it in the fire, and cauterize with a small cautery at the site between the continuation of the ribcage and the neck; and two small cauteries leave, one slightly declining on the side that is left with the beard, and two small cauteries in what declines between the fifth rib and the armpit, declining a little on the sides behind; and another cautery in your own place of the foot; and another on the stomach, and three cauteries in the sites behind; and one cautery in the site between the two sides of the foot.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And so you should not take your hand off the cauterization, but rather, it is in the work of the knot.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And so they have told me that there are some people who use a kind of cauterization with iron similar to fire, and place that one in the site between the ribs, until we come to that pustule and it is healed by itself, thus having said about the pustule of the foot.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	But in this piercing there is no fear that it can happen so easily in the site of the fistula to which there is no healing.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter.xxx.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	On Cauterization of the Wound.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you treat the wound of the hand with water as we have said about the treatment in the division, and do not apply your own treatment to it, then cauterize it according to three ways, all of which are just, the first is that you make three cauteries or four depending on the length of the wound according to the shape of the cauterization of the foot, whose figure has preceded.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And be the thickness of a finger or a little more between each cauterization, and the way of making the cauterization is the way I have said about the cauterization of the foot, face to face.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not take your hand off the cauterization; and the patient is lying on his side.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And another way to cauterize is that you ignite the cautery with two flames, which causes have said in the chapter of dislocation of the muscle, and raise the knot which is in the end of the wound the blood comes out of the patient's left side.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And be your elevation to the one which you raise the knot according to the length of the body, so that cauterizations are made according to the thickness of the flesh.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	Then insert the two flames, light it up, in that part which enters through those two holes the knot from the other side.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	Then remove the cautery; and then there are four cauterizations.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you see that, cauterize with three flames.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	Then cure the wound with a hot iron that has been burning for some days, because it is more certain than other causes preceding in the treatment.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter.xxxi.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	On Cauterization of Droppings.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cauterize not in droppings but rather in an acute pain.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you treat the droppings with the ways of treatment we have said in the division, and do not apply your own treatment to it, then know that he cauterizes with four cauterizations around the navel and one above the stomach, and another on the foot, and another on the hand, and two between the ribs, and one in the right side of the foot, and one on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the quantity of the depth of the cauterization should be proportional to the thickness of the knot.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	Then leave the cautery on for a long time that it gets hot.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not evacuate the patient of treatment just yet that they are added to his two remedies, and the third is added by a third remedy with a quick recovery through the help of God.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The form of the cauterization that is cauterized is clived according to the shape of this one previous to it, and this is with the shape in which it is cauterized on both sides according to its previous shape.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter.xxxii.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	On Cauterization of Feet and Toe Joints.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are aching and swollen with clear water, then know that you should cauterize them by making two cuts on either side of the foot near the big toe and a third cut between the second and third toes, raise your hand with the cauterization and do not twist it; then raise your hand, but do not return it to its place, because the clear water will drain.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	This is the second form of cauterization: And so you make two cuts on each side of the foot near the big toe and a third cut between the second and third toes, and in each joint a cut with a small cautery.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And be the cauterization according to the length of the joint: one on the outside and another on the inside at the middle of the joint, and two cauterizations in each joint.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	Then leave the wound open that it can drain its own blood through the long treatment that it does not bleed any more.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	Then you cure them with those causes we have said.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter.xxxiii.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	On Cauterization of Abdominal Wounds.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When abdominal wound is due to cold and wet that it destroys the vital essence and retentive essence which are in the stomach and intestines, then treat it with the ways of treatment we have said and do not apply your own treatment, and sometimes this wound suffers from a hot cauterization, then cauterize it with a large cauterization on top of the stomach according to what has preceded in the treatment of the stomach, a circular cauterization and four small cauterizations around the navel, a clived small cauterization; and one over the liver on the right side, or two.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if the excess humidity and the mattress allow it, then cauterize the navel and the intestines, and firmly apply two cautery tools to the stomach and next to the groin, because this is a perfect cure for rejuvenating which there is no other.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter .xxxiv.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	Of cauterizing ancient hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When there are ancient hemorrhoids or a mass of thick humors or corrupted moisture, and they are not cured by the treatment described in the previous chapter, then cauterize three times on the pus-filled spine of the two small and small triangular spondyl, and above the navel cut two dices.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if you suspect that the patient's stomach is irritated and their food is not properly digested, and the face is sometimes bloated, then cauterize them on the stomach with a large cautery tool as described above; and with another cautery tool on the back, and with a third cautery tool on the abdomen below the rib cage, leaving the cautery tool in place for a while, and then treat the inside to be healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter .xxxv.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	Of cauterizing athyma and removing them.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you remove athyma, then hold the cautery tool that is assembled.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Then place the lit fire in that athyma ablation and apply the patient' hand so that the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood flows out.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And make it one or two times, because if the holes are deep, then cauterize each one according to what we have described, and then treat them with water that soothes them from within to be healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize with a large cautery tool on the back, it is more effective for healing.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter  .xxxvi.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	De cauterizing fistulas that are formed in nature due to the mixing of different liquids.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not obey the work that we have recommended in its place, and the patient is afraid of water, then heal them with cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Therefore, when there is a fistula in nature due to ancient humors and corrupted moisture, then treat it with water that soothes it from the beginning of the fistula, and then remove the quantity of its depth using the above-mentioned subtle attempt.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Then hold the cautery tool that resembles a flame.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	Then place the lit cautery in this fistula, and according to the quantity in which it mixes with the subtle attempt.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And repeat on that cautery as many times as needed until the corrupt humors are burned up a few times or one or two or three times, depending on your need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And beware of burning nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes to the spine of the bladder or to the hernia, then beware of all those areas; and do not apply water unless the fistula is in a fleshy place and you think it might penetrate.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the area so that it heals.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the area is sealed and the matter of ablation is removed from it, and it has been thus for a long time, then you will know that it is completely healed.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the matter is not taken from it by itself, then you will know that it is penetrating or going into the spine of the leg, or resulting from those causes whose memory will remain in its place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter .xxxvii.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	Of cauterizing the breasts.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When there is pain in the breasts due to cold or strong wind, and because of this, the cow's milk becomes bitter, then treat them as follows: place a cautery tool on each breast, using a cautery tool with which you make holes, through which the memory remains.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And firmly cauterize them with a second small cautery tool, so that three linear cauterizations remain, and then apply more cauterization to the back to be healed.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter  .xxxviii.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	De cauterizing the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When there is pain in the bladder due to cold or moisture that causes the cow' milk not to be retained, then treat it as follows: place a cautery tool at the opening of the bladder on one side, where the spine begins, and cauterize it with a cautery tool on the right side, and with another cautery tool on the left side.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And make the length of each cautery tool according to the amount of the liquid in the bladder; and cauterize it with a cautery tool at the lower opening of the two, or with two cautery tools if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And apply a cauterization that is similar to the one described above.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter .xxxix.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	Of cauterizing the back.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When there is pain in the back due to cold or moisture, and because of this, the cows' milk becomes corrupted, and the heat of their bodies delays their calving, and there is a delayed occurrence of their pregnancy, and there is pain due to their movements, then treat them as follows: place three cauterization tools around the navel, just like we have described for the bladder; and on the lower part of the back, or two cauterization tools, and apply a cauterization tool that is similar to those described above.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter  .xl.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	Of cauterizing the dislocation of the ankle.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When moist air is spread at the opening of the ankle, and the cause of the swelling of its liquid is that the cow's foot is prolonged over the other when compared to each other.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the area of dislocation is turned in it as if it were a piece of meat.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then treat the cow' foot on the opening of the ankle with a cautery tool that is similar to the one described above, and place it carefully so that the opening does not fall into its normal place.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And make the cautery tool mentioned above, which precedes the form in cauterizing the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this cautery is not suitable for you, then treat them with three large cauterization tools.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And make the cautery according to the quantity of the bitterness of all the meat; and then treat it so that it heals.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter   .xli.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	Of cauterizing the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When there is pain at the opening of the ankle and it is due to cold and moisture, then treat them with water that has been described above, which does not exist; and if it is ancient pain, then you will miss out on the humors, and if they are large, then treat them with rotten pills or artificial or similar ones; and then cauterize them.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And the way of cauterizing is according to two ways: or cauterize with burning medicines, or cauterize with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	The second is that you cauterize them on the back of the cow with three triangular cautery tools according to this shape; and make them a good depth.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And make the space between each cautery tool the amount of its thickness, and if the cauterization tool is large or small.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	A few times will be the cautery on the middle of the back of the cow over the shoulder blade to make four cauterizations.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	If you wish, then treat them with the circle described above, which precedes the form in cauterizing the dislocation of the ankle, and make it a circular one that burns the bitterness of all the meat.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the way to cauterize in the crotch when pain is attached to the ankle and does not extend within the space of the crotch.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	But if it extends within the crotch, then cauterize this two cauteries on the crotch above the place where you turn the patient that is the pain; and one cautery on the pelvic bone for four times a little more of the cervical region.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if the knife cautery, and it is the depth of the cautery according to the quantity of the severity of the wound.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the patient feels that the pain extends within the area proper, then cauterize this here where you turn the patient for three points or four or more if you want to of that.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the patient feels pain between their legs, then cauterize this here with a knife cautery.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And keep in all cauterization that you do not use the cautery on nerve endings or great nerves, and so to you it is about the patient's pain or unnecessary pain or restraint.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And you have already seen one of those whom I cauterized on the pelvic bone and finished in the cauterization, and the fire bed inflated within so that the tumor achieved the foot, and the fire pierced and corrupted the whole foot.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And then a very good solution for the stomach happened, and death came.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two places together, then cauterize each according to this way.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And the wise ones said in the cauterization of the ankle cautery from which this is the way to do it: make a circle of iron like a ring whose circuit is most a palm; and should be deves the hole or opening according to the thickness of a date fruit or half a palm.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And inside that circle is another third; and is the distance between them the quantity of the knot of the finger; and let those circles be open from two sides; and is the length of those knots one or two, and make in those margins of iron nicely dressed in the circles; and this is the way of it:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Then set fire to it in the middle so that it grows red and gives off sparks, and place it over the ankle joint, the patient lying on its side.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And then cauterize this with three cauteries rounded on a flat surface.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then leave this one for three days; and apply ointment to this one with a bandage and let the wound be open for five days; and then heal this one by applying balm to it so that it is cured.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Albucasis said: Or son, of this kind of cauterization we have used little for the terror of looking at it, and for that reason few have found those who look up to it.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	But some of these cauterizations will be found by those who suffered from them, and they will turn away from that place.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	But the cauterizations with medicinal astringents are those that you make two circles with an armature pierced in which they should put the knot of the door of iron; and is the length of the parts in their thicknesses two knots or those.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the distance between them is the quantity of the thickness of a finger; and are open above and below, and are so that they contain themselves among themselves according to this form:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	And then place it over the ankle joint, the patient lying on its side, and compress your hand on the other ankle; and take a tail of water and pour it between those circles, and the quality of that one is with small fire little by little, and let that one endure for the quantity of an hour, and suffer the patient the mordication and the itchiness of it — for such is the fire's itchiness — until the itchiness ceases.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And then raise your hand with the instrument and wipe off the tail of water from all the ankle with double water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And then leave this one for three days and put a bandage over it so that the itchiness remains red, and leave it for some more days, and run water over it, and this is the last of the cure.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then heal this one by applying balm to it so that it is cured.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain extends within the crotch or the chest, then make a statue of it with water so that is held in the ankle' engagement.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the way of the tail of water, and I have already written that one in the treatise of the correction of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	And take the alkaline and the non-extinct cause of both together a part, and cut them into pieces and place them in a new wave from which the part leaves is pierced by a small hole, according to the quantity that enters it.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And then leave the tail of that wave and take the alkaline and the lively water of double water for that one, and then, when you compress those two with your hand by good compression, and then let that one go from it to the wave that sends off the sharp water to the part left on the wavy wave.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And then adjust all that water, and pour it on the lively alkaline and another one, because that one is greatly increased by a strong fire, which is administered in small medicine doses and in cauterizations of other members, for the operation makes fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And of the medicines some that are cauterized with a broad sword, as it sharpens and grinds the dry ash and mixes them.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And Gualia told of a man of the arts the operation and the cure by which he was cured of ankle pain and sciatic pain, and he praised it greatly, saying that there was no need for another cure, and because it is healed by a full day such as it is hard to understand that one's work and his eyes are already dried up about that.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And it is that it be taken a very green leaf, and if it is not vertified, then take a recent fig; and the third is to be trissada with a little gray and placed on the ankle where the pain is, or in the crotch, or in the chest, and be looked at.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And leave it for the quantity of three hours or the quantity that the patient feels the itchiness of a little bit of pain.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And then put that one in the bath and then when the patient's body is hot, put that one in the water because the pain ceases and it is healed.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And you know that you do not need to use any cauterization with these medicines, but to eliminate the contents of the body.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	But already Euclid said that when the goat's vein is tightened by a cut, then it is better to use iron; and the cauterization with this way: take wool and immerse it in old oil, and place it between the feet of the foot and between the pebbles.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And then take a dry goat's cut and inflame that one with fire so that it is carbonized; and then place that one over the wool and leave it until it is hardened.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And then repeat it with water, and do not stop until the water' s spark reaches the ankle where the itchiness is felt, and leave that pain.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	This way of cauterization is called cow's cauterization.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter LII.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	Of the Cauterization of Pain in Two Parts.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Some days' pain is in two parts because of two causes, as by accident or by piercing or by excessive elimination, and because of those that seem similar, by the introduction of rubbing matter and wetness.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And cauterization does not occur in any other species than this one, which is performed by spreading out the substance.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	So then, when evacuating the patient's bowels and bladders, let them be filled with water that is made hot, which are to be applied to the two places where there is pain on a line according to their latitude, since you have five lines in total, three of them for the pain to go away quickly, one of them so that it does not come back and another so that it does not spread.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And cauterization is to be done with a pointed cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, cauterize with three or four cauterizations by thrusting in medially according to this form:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter LII.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	On the cauterization at the beginning of giddiness.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	You can recognize this malady in small children; and it is necessary to be careful about the beginning of it, since if it affects their skeleton it can cause a lot of damage to their structure by raising the joints and movements.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And you will see in the last vertebra of the back and the neck that it has already begun to rise above the other vertebrae.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And when you see this and want to stop it, then cauterize it with a circular cauterization according to this form:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	so that the cauterization is applied evenly around the entire vertebra.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you want, cauterize in the circle of the vertebra with a pointed cautery, two or three lines.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	So that the points are close to each other.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	Then clean the area thoroughly with water, which we have mentioned.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	However, be careful that cauterization is not administered in giddiness, which is caused by nerve spasms.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter LIV.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	On the cauterization of gout and joint pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And therefore, if gout of a friction cause is treated with care and not relapsed into pain, then the repeated cauterizations will be unnecessary.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	This is because you cauterize the evacuation in the circle of the joint of the foot with a certain number of cauterizations.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let it be made with an olive oil cauterization, whose form is this:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary that points be made on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pains persist and spread to the other joints, and they are getting worse, then cauterize each joint with three or four cauterizations in total using this olive oil cauterization method.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if you find that these cauterizations are not enough, then cauterize it without pressing too hard on the hand with the cauterization before and after, only by applying it to the surface of the foot.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pains persist in the hand and the second joint, then administer the cauterization we mentioned in the previous chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pains only affect the last joint and it is called "suagra", then make points in the circle of the joints as they rotate, making two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if the pains persist in the fingers, then make points in the circle of the joints on each finger and on the thumb's knuckle.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pains persist in any of the fingers or in the thighs or legs, then cauterize each one completely.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And do not evacuate the bowels if they are not regular or if they do not receive medicines properly; because if it is done well and the fever is evacuated with this cauterization, God will help you.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter XLV.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	On the cauterization of broken bones.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When there is a fracture in the thigh bone and the intestines come out in front of the abdomen, and it has just begun to move, then cover it with a cloth so that it does not hurt; let it rest for three days, and use gentle treatment to prevent any pain or injury.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	Then follow the patient' back between your legs on their back, and command them to keep their back warm; so that the intestines do not move or show, or the bowels come out.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	Then return it to its place with the help of a staff, and try to break it at the end of the spine where it joins the rib cage; so that it is similar to a half circle split in two.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Then light the cauterization with this form:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	In a place where it is warm, and it gives off a strong odor of smoke.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient' thighs and placed a cushion under them; some servants should be on hand to help with their legs, and another to assist with their feet, making sure they are comfortable.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	Then place the cauterization on that mark with your right hand while holding it to the left, and let it be done quickly; so that the bone of the thigh is joined together in the middle by two joints, and repeat this process if it does not work in the first place.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	Observe carefully during cauterization to ensure that the intestine does not burn, so that there is no death or other great misfortune.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And you know that when you do not have the bones, your work is not complete.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	Then let the cauterization of children be subtle according to their age and size.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	Then clean the area of the cauterization for three days so that it does not cause a recurrence of the fever.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then clean them all with water to heal them.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	Let the patient rest on their back for 40 days, keeping them warm and protecting them from illness.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	Then provide food according to the length of time for the cure; so that the abdomen does not swell and the intestine is not burned by effort in healing.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	Then when they are ready to be taken away after 40 days, do so with care; and keep them for another 40 days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And be careful in your work and in the consumption of food and drink; for it is through this whole treatment that healing will come.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	Then examine the other fractures in the abdomen, and if they are not adjusted, then cauterize them with a circular cauterization according to their quantity, and so that it does not hurt. And let it be cleaned with water, which we have mentioned, and not adjusted.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And already some say that the first fracture should be cauterized with a triangular cauterization according to this form, since it is marked in three places:
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	And the line is placed at a third of the way up from the bottom because it is marked in three places: above and below the fracture, and a third point between them; and the first cauterization is made with a pointed cautery, which is easier and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter XLVI.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	On the cauterization of twisted bones.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When there is pain in the limbs from a blow or a beating and it persists for a long time, and you do not provide relief with medicines; then cauterize with a pointed cauterization.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And let the cauterization of each member be done according to its size and age, and its strength and flexibility; and the location of the twisted pain and the kind of pain it causes.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	Therefore if the first cauterization is effective, it is good; and if not, repeat it, for it is customary with those pains that they are punctures of a member to that which approaches him from behind by means of which we may achieve what you need to do the cauterization while the patient is healed.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter .xlvii.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	On the cauterisation of leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Some leprous diseases are greatly improved by a strong cauterisation, and mildly so if the cause of the leprous disease is putrefaction from fire or melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And so, if you wish to cauterise that, consider whether the leprosy is more severe or not and treat it with those things which we have said in the chapter; do not stop, nor does the patient's whole body and complex fear you; then cauterise that on top of the head with two cauters: one at the base of the hairline, and a second behind it, at the crown of the head; and both on either side; and one behind, on the neck or collar.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And last, with your hand on the cauterisation a little while within the bone to produce a slight contraction, and thus the scabs are removed, so that the exhale of thick vapours is relieved from him; and cauterise on the foot as necessary.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if the leprosy has already spread over the whole body and appears clearly, then consider that you cauterise that with those cauterisations which we have said in the head; and cauteris on the tip of the nose, and two on either cheek, and two on the two shoulders of the neck, and one on the collarbone, and a large one near the collarbone, and one on the chest, and two on the knees, and one on each ankle, and two on each leg, and two on the Achilles tendons of his feet; and cauteris all the joints of his limbs and feet, and on the heels of his feet, and the folds of his clothes.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And keep away from the nerves which are above the bone that you do not burn those.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	Some are cauterised with one cauterisation on the bone of the little finger and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the fistula.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And know that the more you apply cauterisations, the more it is rejuvenated and confirmed; and know that leprosy does not feel pain in cauterisation, but the body does feel stupor because of it.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	Then consider that the cauterisations are many or few according to the limbs and joints, since they are preceded by the spices of the instruments.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then bring the cauterisation with eructation bread, molted meal, and another cure within it while it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter.xlviii.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	On the cauterisation of stupor.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When any member is shaken or asleep and is not healed with medicines, oils, and plasters, then you should cauterase the shaken member according to the size of the limb or the age of the person.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And let that be the main cauterisation that enters the essence of the bond a little while.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then bring that with dung within it while it is healed.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And some are cauterised with that stupor which goes to the limbs and feet, and at the shoulders of the neck, and the nerves that move that member; and it returns with stupor.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	No further proceed on this unless you are knowledgeable in the anatomy of the limbs and the exit of the nerves throughout the body.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter.xlix.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	On the cauterisation of scars that are formed.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When scars are old and do not confer with any of the medicines, then you should cauterise on it with a small cauterisation according to the amount of the essence of the bond within it while the whiteness and colour of it is changed, and the colour of it is modified.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	Then bring that with eructation bread and lentils, with rozene oil and arnica leaves, and holy water or st. John's wort, each a little, and all mixed together, and place a cloth over the area and leave it for healing.
Capitol .l.	Chapter.l.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	On the cauterisation of sores.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When cancer begins and you wish to turn that, then cauterise it with a circular cauterisation along its course as it turns.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And the wise said that it should be cauterisised with the last cauterisation in its place; but I have not seen this, for I fear that it is ulcerated, and I have seen it a few times.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And it is better to cauterise it in its course with a circular cauterisation or a few cauterisations as we have said, or a single one.
Capitol .li.	Chapter.li.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	On the cauterisation of pustules.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When any pustule is delayed in maturity and thus comes out through excessive sweating or by age, since it is old in decay, of little strength, or by time, and you wish to hasten its maturity; then cauterisise it along its course with a small number of cauterisations, and leave it, for it will quickly mature.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	But if you wish to pierce it with a cauterisation, then consider this way to do it: and place that in the middle of the pustule while piercing it with the cauterisation; and leave it.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you place the cauterisation in that spot which is placed on the arm, so that the whole body of the arm is relieved; then bring that within it while it is healed.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter.lii.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	On the cauterisation of corrosion.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corrosion is ambulant corruption in the limb, which corrodes it as it eats dry wood with fire.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Then if you can find the location of that corrosion and it suffers fire cauterisation with a few small cauterisations, and many according to that spot where it is corrosion.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	Then cauterise that entirely, removing all corrosion, and do not leave any cause of it remaining.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	Then leave that for three days, and place a cloth over the cauterised spots, mixed with three parts of oil while all the corruption is completely eradicated and all the corrosion is gone.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	Then bring that with dung containing milk within it.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	But if after three times the meat is born healthy and there is no corruption, it is good; otherwise, repeat the cauterisation on that which is corrupted in the areas where it is decayed.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	Corrosion is cured with some herbs with acute medicines, since that is half a treatment instead of cauterisation.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	But cauterisation with fire is much better.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And it has already said that the cure of it with acute medicines in the division, and so take that which you will give to him when he is in need.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter.liiii.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	On the cauterisation of claws and of other similar things.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Some are caused by the split of the nail which is called claw, and it is a gross cause, and that splits, and cauterise it according to two ways: one is cauterisation with fire, and another is cauterisation with water, or a tail.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	But cauterisation with fire is that you ignite the cauterisation which resembles the flickering of a torch, and it is made of iron according to the amount of the claw from the beginning, and it is very thin in width.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	And then place that spark on the knuckle, and then move your hand with cautery around the knuckle until the cautery reaches the depth of the knuckle.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	And let it rest for three days before it begins to swell.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	Then apply a paste made of dried sage leaves, and let the paste remain on it for a night, as this will remove its roots.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	Then heal the wound with a salve of healing ointment until it is healed.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	If they are not converted, and blisters occur on the surface of the body, mostly on the feet, then prepare a small amount of water with some salt or iron or a piece of stone, and place it on the knuckle; then pour a little bit of water onto that compress from your hand, and let your hand rest on it, and then turn the compress upside down and squeeze the water into the knuckle's root, and then wait for the patient for an hour, and then remove it, as the knuckle will be healed with its roots.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	Then apply this to all of them until they are all gone throughout the body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	Then heal the blisters that the roots of the knuckles have been eradicated with water from the healing ointment that the flesh generates.
Capitol .liiii.	Chapter III.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	Of cauterization for tremors.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When this tremor occurs from rubbing on the nerves or from fever due to rubbing or from a similar cause, then prepare that it is cauterized with four cauterizations or with five over the spine of two, with one cauterization between each spine; and with a cauterization on the feet, and on the abdomen, and with an olive cauterization.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And that tremor of the patient will cease and speed up the healing of the fever.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter L.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	Of cauterization for accidental injuries to the body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When in the body white blisters occur and pus-filled holes are formed by corrupt materials, then at the beginning of their appearance, let it be cauterized with a subtle fire on the tip of an awl, or with a long razing cut, or with a slow cauterization.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And some blisters are opened with cauterization at the beginning of their expulsion according to this method; and they are not painful, and the excess fluid is removed by doing so, and it heals from them.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	But especially let water be prepared for the evacuation with bloodletting.
Capitol lvi.	Chapter LVI.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	Of cauterization of a flow of blood from an injury by piercing with an arrow.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	If there is a flow of blood due to an injury that has caused the plague to spread, or due to a burst blister or a wound in the member, and then similar things occur, and it is difficult to repair it.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Then if there is a little bit of blood, prepare a cushion with your hand at the arrow's orifice, and let it rest on it so that the blood does not flow down from the point; and do not allow it to run out.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And then place a small and large olive cauterization on the fire, and exhale over them until they are lit up.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	Then take from them a small or a large according to the injury and the plague at which the artery has been broken, more quickly than if you were to wait for the point to stop moving, and then cauterize it until it is finished; and let the cauterization be close to where the blood comes out.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the blood flows from the artery's orifice while you are holding the point and exhaling the cauterization, then take another cauterization that is prepared with cauterizations on the fire, and then do not stop doing this; and let the cauterization be close to where the blood comes out.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And keep in mind that you don't burn the nerve that is here, and that something else does not occur on the patient.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And you should know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to stop it with cauterization, and even more so when the artery is large, unless in four ways: either by cauterizing as it is said to be done, or by extracting before it is extracted, because when it is extracted the extremities of the patient get burned and the blood is stopped; or that it is bound with a rope or a ligature by a strong tension, or that it is placed on medicine whose virtue stops the blood; and they are strangled with the pillow with a constriction.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	But that which administers a gentle restriction of the patient with a ligature and with a constriction of the cloth or by position due to fire or similar causes, does not do anything good.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	But if there is a little bit of blood, and it is not the medicine that has been presented or the medicine itself, then open the point of the incision on the vein in such a way as to have said above, and understand the great constriction of the patient within which the blood stops from spreading, and over the arrow with fire sprayed in such a way that the injury heals and thickens; and also burn the skin where cauterization or medicine is needed.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Chapter II.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Of incision and piercing and of bloodletting and of plagues and of their appearances.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are words from Avicenna's.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	I have spoken in the first chapter about all the disease of fever when cauterization with fire and medicine are necessary, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments that are useful for cauterization; and I have ordered the chapters of the second part within the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And I will speak in this chapter according to that doctor's way, so that what he wants is obtained, then on it that the patient asks for.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	Before I start speaking here, know that this is for the patient's fear what was spoken about in the first chapter of cauterization.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And for the patient that caution is necessary, because in the operation described in this chapter blisters occur from the injury or from an eruption on the skin or from the removal of blood through a vein or incision on the blister or opening of a wound or similar things.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And all of them are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in addition to that is death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I warn you that on you this does not happen, because some blisters occur from the injuries of men in a way similar to how they get sick.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And of them is some that runs away to their own disease and is killed by its violence; and the length of their disease is fear, which means death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And those are the ones that give you peace and quiet, and you expect them to be healthy, and their disease is destructive.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And therefore I do not consent to that which sees you in this way; and your caution should be greater than caution, and your haste less; and do not presume on any cause over it unless it is a certain knowledge that certifies it as yours, and the following praise-worthy.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And use in the treatment of all your diseases by diagnosis and indication, because in it is saved health, for in this is your help in acquiring fame and memory, praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	O, son, God blesses you with wisdom, for he has placed you in his care.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have ordered this chapter distinguishing by chapters as it follows in the chapter of cauterization, from the care of the head to the feet, so that it may be easy for you from there and from which you need it.
Capitol primier.	Chapter one.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	Of the treatment of water which is contained in the head of children.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	Know that this hernia is seen in children when the birth takes place and when the child's head is lifted up.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And some are hidden because of a cloudy cause which is not understood.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	May I not seen this disease except in children; and all those that I have seen die, and for this reason it is a wonderful work in them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I have seen a child whose head was filled with water, and his head always remained too big for him to be able to hold it up because of its size, and more than the moisture increased inside him until death came upon him.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this moisture or is added between the cheek and the ear, or is added behind the ear, over the bone.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	For the operation in that if the moisture is between the cheek and the ear, and the swelling is little, then you should cut in the middle place of the head as if there were a crack in the depth, and let it run on two sides within which runs the moisture, and this is the form of the pimple:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And so if the moisture is increased and the swelling is greater, then there are two cracks according to this method:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the moisture is behind the ear, then it is a sign that you open the lips of the head completely and squeeze out the water when you press them from within, and it does not remain in your mouth.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	Then you should cut in the middle place of the head according to this method:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And take out all the moisture; and strengthen the cracks with wool and plasters; and pour oil from above on to it for five days, and then remove the bandage and cure the swelling with herbs and ointment, and strengthen the head with equality; and eat dry food of little moisture within so that the member is comforted and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And there is another way of cutting which you consider proper for the size of the swelling and the collection of water, because some are greater on the back of the head, or on the left side, or on the right; and so cut where the swelling and the filling of water appear, and pour it out according to how easy you can do it.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that you do not cut the artery, and let the blood flow freely from the wound because of the flow of water.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter 2.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	Of cutting the arteries which are placed on the ears, called hilus.
Capitol segon.	Chapter two.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When there is a cough or a fever in the chest or in the foot, and it is old, do not apply medicines to it, but last of all, apply the cure by cutting those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And then cut when you want to cut the head of the patient, and rub the place with rough cloth so that the arteries appear, and make strong the neck of the patient with some cloth; and consider where the vein is; and the places on each side of the ears are wrinkled, and hidden except in certain men.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And so examine the vein, and cut each one with a pimple from each side of the head towards the ear, and let it run for the depth of the head;
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you want to, insert the knife behind the artery, and take it from the side that is cut.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And the length of the incision should be two inches apart because when a vein is cut, the pulse beats frequently, and it would stop if cut.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	May the artery not be felt when you measure the distance from the ear, because then take three inches of space between them, and examine it; and let it run into the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And that is enough to cut a quantity of blood worth four pints. And it is strong enough to run in the blood of him; and this is according to the quantity that appears from the virtue of the patient and the filling up of the artery.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And consider the swelling, and if there is any cause of the bone, then cut it out in order not to cause swelling.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And strengthen the swelling with wool and a bandage of cloth, and cure it with ointment within so that it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter three.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	Of the extraction of the arteries which are placed in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When there is an emigrant headache or a pulsating one, because of the herbal moisture and because of its quality in the temple veils, or it is violent and similar to those, and it is medicated with the methods of medication of herbs and water, but you do not benefit them, then we turn to these diseases by extracting the arteries in the temples, or cauterizing those.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the way of the operation and extraction of those is that the patient cuts his hair which is in the temples; because it is shown by the pulse of the temple, for it is revealed by the pulse of the head, and it is hidden except in a few men because of its speed.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if you are hidden, then strengthen the neck of the patient with some cloth; and rub the place with a rough cloth or evaporate the place with water so that the artery appears clearly to you.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	Then take the pimple in which this is the form:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then you should cut the cheek with ease so that you can reach the artery; and pull it forward and extract that from the sides independently within which you remove those from the cheeks and discover those from the veils which are left behind.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	May the artery be thin, then wrap it with the end of the bone, and cut each one from that part according to the size so that the ends are lengthened and the flow of blood is stopped because if they were not cut, the blood would not rise.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And last of all, evacuate the blood from four pints. From two to three.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the artery is large, then cut it in two places with a strong thread of silk or a cord that does not break, and do not let it get rotten before the swelling is healed and the flow of blood stops.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And cut the excess which is between two bandages; and do it at that hour or at another.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you want to, cauterize it with a knife within the bone so that the ends are cut, and keep this work in place.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it is better work than that the patient has fever or is in a cold state of body; because cauterization is of those causes that help to end the moisture, and so it is better for healing.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And so extract the arteries which are in the back of the neck, and place it on a clean cloth, and let it dry well, and cure it with dry medicines to keep the flesh from rotting and to make the blood flow within so that it is healed.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if while opening another wound in the groin there is an escape of blood from the ligature, then you tie up that blood loss or cauterize it or plug up the hole, and tighten your hand within such that it is restrained by the bandage.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if for some reason that does not exist in you, then stop the bleeding by holding it in place until the wound has healed, and plug up the hole with water of a violent coldness until the pain subsides, and strengthen it as necessary to avoid the risk of infection.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And if the blood is coming out of the ligature, then you cauterize the vein with two sharp tools, pushing them together, and pausing each time, lighting a fire, until it reaches the bone and splits the vein in two places, so that blood can flow between the extremities, since they are not joined together by this cauterization.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	This is the method of cauterizing:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And let the two tools be sharp.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	However, if the sharpness of the two tools is weak, then two sharp tools are better, because they do not cut the flesh with great speed.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore, in those places where there is some thickness, the fire's heat should be applied gently so that the flesh is not wounded.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	This work is better in all works and done more lightly.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And be the space between the two tools the quantity of the thickness of the wound.
Capitol quart.	I capitulate.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	Of the treatment for acute and acidic wounds of the joints.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When the acute and acidic pain is in the joints of the neck, which protrudes from the top of the head, and there is no reason for medical treatment, and sometimes the face of the patient becomes red and it feels like it is on fire, and the joints hurt so much that their hair is damaged, and their eyelids are burned by the bitterness of the tears, the ancient remedies for treating such a procedure, and they do not benefit from those treatments.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And you order the servant to shave the hair from the forehead quickly, and make three cuts evenly spaced out according to the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the cut falls in two ways: the first cut is evenly spaced out to the length of the nose at the middle of the forehead, and the second cut is according to the length of a small piece of string that hangs from the lacrimal, and the third cut is on the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And guard against the incision of the ligatures that are in two places, and stretch your hand out from the continuation of both mandibles.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space between each cut is three times the length of a thread.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a dry sponge or dried sheets that are useful for drying out the wound.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	Then introduce the sharp extremities of the sponge, and this is the shape of the incision:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	which begins at one temple and ends at the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Exorcise all the tissue between two cuts, leaving a strip that is over the bone, and then make a small incision at one end of this strip, continuing into the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	Then hold the sponge and enter it into the first incision again, or another tool called a knife, which is held on one side and not sharp on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And pause the ligature of that flesh attached to the bone, and let it drop over the strip, and cut off all the vessels that descend from the head to the joints.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	However, if the incision needs to be continued after the strip has been cut off, and then make a small incision in the middle of the strip, and continue it into the other incision.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And then, if blood comes out of the wound in a large quantity, squeeze the pressure points on the feet of the tightened wound.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	Then place a small piece of cloth on each cut, and place the powder that is mixed with blood, oil, and vinegar, and wet it so that it does not cause a puss.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day, release the joint and give a large infusion of water, wine or rosewater, and then treat it with bazilic oil or rosewater, and other things until the blisters are healed.
Capitol .v.	I capitulate.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	Of the treatment for coughs and joints that descend from the openings inside the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When there is an acute cough and it continues, and sometimes the patient's joints become very painful, and their eyelids are swollen and sore, and in the preon of the head there is a sharp pain and an unusual discharge, then know that these accidents only come from the inside of the head.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best treatment for such things is this: order the servant to shave the forehead, and make a cut in the middle of the forehead, a small amount according to its length (and begin the cut at the left temple, ending at the right temple; and make the cut over the bone; and stretch your hand out from the mandibles that are useful for chewing, as far as the exposed bone).
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry all the wound with a sponge or dried cloth, and then fill in the space between the two lips of the wound with a thin strip of cloth or cloth.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	Then place a small amount of the powder that is mixed with blood, oil, and vinegar on it, so that it does not cause a puss.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when the pus has decreased and you see that it is starting to dry up, then know that you should make a paste of flour and water in equal parts, and add four parts of perfumed oil, and make it into an ointment and apply it to the blisters as if you were making a dough.
Capitol .vi.	I capitulate.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	Of the treatment for water that drips in the ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	Any cause that drips in the ears is one of four spices, because it is either mineral and similar to salt, or lead and like, or plant and similar to nettle, or fava, or fluid and similar to water, oil, and vinegar, or from any animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And when salt drips in the ear or another similar cause to those causes that do not fit, and hold the ear to the sun, and if the salt drops, then distill it into oil of violets or cumin, and then administer the infusion to it, and make it cough gently, and pour the spit onto the wall with care.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	Then place some cloth or wool around the ear, and stretch the ear to the sun, because the cause of drooping is due to these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it does not drop, then administer the infusion with the tool called a gentle squeeze, and this is the shape:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	If it drops with a squeeze, that is good; otherwise, administer the infusion with a handful of soft clay.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And if it does not drop with water, then make a tube of Aram and insert the end into the canal of the ear, and plug it with wax and softened oil, so that it is not too large but just right for the tube.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And then extract them from me with a strong grip, for ten fingers full of water that I have counted.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	Maybe if it is not foreseen in this way, then take a ring-plunger or a suitable apparatus and press a small quantity, and pause that at the end of the ray, and wrap that around that corner decently paused.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And then insert that in the hole of the ear with ease, and then dry the ear from the moisture.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And if it is not foreseen in any of the ways that we have counted, then you should cut off that which has formed an abscess or spasm at the front.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the way to cut that off is that you start by cutting the blood vessel at its beginning and then extract it from there according to the virtue of the ring, and then make that hole between your fingers, and then turn the ear towards the sides, and then insert a small knife in the hole at the root of the ear, greasing it with oil.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And if the hole is of the shape of the moon and penetrates into the ear, and when the ear is blocked, block that with an appropriate instrument; and then sew up the hole in that position quickly, and cure that inside so that it is healed.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause is caused by fat that you eat and it swells up, then administer the cure and extract it; but if you do not obey your doctor's orders and instead take a thin spit according to this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	and then administer that fat which has fallen in the ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not pour water when you think that it is already moist with the vapor of the ear, and pause that in small pieces, and then extract those by the fingers or by a small instrument, or by cutting off as said have, because it is relieved to extract it.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	Maybe in the water that is entered into the ear it happens that the patient uses a sneeze at the beginning, and he fills his ear with a small amount of hay, and then hits that ear with a few pieces of hay, and if by water it is foreseen, it is good; and otherwise, then take two sharp pieces of hay according to the length of the said, and burn those pieces slightly, and let the patient insert one of those pieces in his ear, and then he jumps on the floor a little with that piece in his ear, and then hit that ear with another piece of hay over the part that has fallen out.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Then do not stop pouring water until all the water is foreseen.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc .i., e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And then pour the water again as if you were to take paper or a piece of gauze, that is to say, and then put one end in the ear and stretch the other end towards the fire until it is completely burned.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	Then put the other one and pour water repeatedly until all the water is foreseen, and then insert that with a cannula as said has been extracted.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	Maybe in the extraction of a beast that enters into that ear, if it is a small thing, then pour water and wash it as said has been divided; but if it is a large thing that causes pain to the head by means of wind, then administer the extraction with a sharp instrument or with a knife, and that of the beast is lighter than all the other causes that cause pain in the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	Maybe in the extraction of vermen that is generated in the ear, when you administer water to extract it as said has been divided and in the book of distillation, and do not give your cure, then look at the ear towards the sun.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if here appears any cause of the vermen, then extract that with a sharp instrument or with a small knife, but if there does not appear any cause, then take a cannula which is wide at the end and narrow at the beginning, and this is the form of it:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	and then insert the narrow end in the ear according to the quantity that it suffers pain, and then suck it strongly with a firm suction, and pour water repeatedly, so that all the vermen are foreseen.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	And if you do not obey your doctor' orders and instead take a piece of wax according to what has been said, then administer the distillation processes that have already been mentioned in the cure of worms, and then pour water in the distillation process.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And be your effusion with which you pour the medicinal oils into the ear using this instrument, and this is its form:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	and then make that of silver or bronze, wide at the end, so that there is a small hole at the top.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And if it is necessary to cover that with wax here, where it is necessary to fill in the cavity of the cannula to prevent it from flowing.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you want, take the ring and wrap it around the end with care; and then pour the oil into the cavity of the ear, or suck juice from any herb, or water that you want of these medicines in the cannula — and this is in the ear, which is in the hole — and then put the ring on it with a quick compression to prevent the oil from escaping into the cavity of the ear, and feel the oil inside.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And that water which is already poured in the ear has been slightly burned with fire.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	and be sure that the cause that you will distil in the ear is not too much burned, for the ear does not suffer water.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	Of Cure for Ear Aching.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Some times the belly of the old is not pierced by the nail, and then it happens in some men that an ache appears in the meat of the ear because of wind or for nothing; and this ache sometimes is caused by piercing the ear with a pin, and sometimes it is caused by the sides being apart.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And that which happens in the meat of the ear, which does not understand the wind, is in difficult situations for healing.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in that which you obtain the wind, be sure to pause the ear of the patient towards the sun and look at it.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if there is a good opportunity, open that with a small knife whose form is as follows:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the end of it is small in width, and one part is sharp and the other is not; and the knife is two-edged so that it does not cut the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And if the ache is caused by hidden flesh in the ear or in the meat of it, then take that with a small knife and cut it with great ease so that all the flesh is removed.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the ache is in the hole of the ear, then take a small sharp knife and burn that slightly with fire, and then insert that in the meat of the ear.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And if you smell a good opportunity with water that the patient gains by ease, try to press it by ease; and be sure not to trouble the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then pause in the ear a strip of linen according to the width of the hole that you wrapped with Egyptian ointment; and pour water for a few days so that you are sure of the consolidation of the ache; or take some and sprinkle it on dry leaves and use it; and if the ear is already swollen, then be sure to destroy the strips and change them with others that you wrap in wax that is made with rose oil, so that the swelling of the aching stops; and then cure that inside so that it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	If, however, there is a flow of blood, then submerge the sponge or cloth in water and place it over the ear, and use another treatment that stops the flow of blood, which is described in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter .viii.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	On the treatment of an azil that should be applied to the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Athel that should be applied to the eyelids of the patient: some are wet, and some are dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Then you have those that should be warm or cool: and scrape off those hairs from the area, and place a hot cloth over the area in three places.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	If there is a pain that blood flows from, then you should cauterize those with a small, delicate cautery.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cauterization is to return those cuts and scrapes when there is still a cause of their hairs; and when they are cauterized with fire, those hairs are burned and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter .ix.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Treatment for a large wound that is on the eyelids of the patient.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	A wound on the eyelids of the patient: some cause that is gathered into a mass in its strength and toughness, and thus it grows larger, and therefore it is called large.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And it is an addition of thick moisture on the lower eyelid and above it.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Then the operation in detail is: if the size is increasing above and beyond the eyelid, and it spreads out widely; and the cause of this is slight.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Then open that with a sharp instrument by its width, and remove that from all parts with ease, and suspend that with an ointment, and cut off that.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	If you do not have the equipment for this incision: if you cannot pierce the eyelid with a small knife, then there is no need to go any further because it will not cause a problem.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the size is large, then you adjust it with sutures: and treat that so that it heals.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is small, then you will not have any trouble with that wound because its blood restores it and heals it.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the large size is declining towards the center of the eyelid inside, then open the lid and suspend that large size with an ointment, apart from the incision, and press it from all parts; and if the eyelid is elongated by the incision, then there is no need to go any further because it will not cause a problem.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And as for the incision, wash the patient's body with saltwater; and treat the wound with water that heals it so that it heals.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	On the treatment of an aching eye on the upper eyelid of the patient.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Achornath is when it is born in the tunics of the upper eyelid, and mainly it affects children: it causes them to cry tears of bitterness because they cannot look at the light of the sun; and they cannot see clearly because of this.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And so you have to look constantly at their faces all the time, and they sleep with their eyelids wet because of tears: and, in their upper eyelids, there are eyebrows covered with swelling, and the appearance of pain seems to be close to them; and when you press the area with your fingers, you feel a sharp pain within them.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And there is a way to operate in which the patient holds his head in the hand and places it on a cloth; and you place a cloth over him and a little bit of pressure, and make a circle according to the quantity that contains arthenach all at once, and place that over the area and press it with your fingers so that sharp pain is felt in the middle of the circle, and then open it in the middle of that moisture with a sharp instrument that cuts through its width, and the wound does not exceed what is made in flabotomy.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	If, however, you do not have the equipment ready: because in its various positions you operate arthenach by a wound according to the shape of white blotchiness.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Then take that with the cloths that you have wrapped between your fingers, and turn it over from one side to another quickly so that it is ripped apart.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And be careful not to pierce the area with the point of the instrument because its moisture does not reach the patient's body and it is rejected by him.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	If, however, you have not yet observed the appearance of arthenach at the beginning of the wound: rather, you should place a cloth with ease in the wound so that it is removed by it; and then take it out: and then dip the cloth in water and see grass, and place it on the area, and sprinkle some dust.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And then pour salt over that: and place it in the depression of the wound so that water that is left from that moisture.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that area so that it heals.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	If, however, a fever breaks out in the area: then treat that with plasters made of mint, so that it heals.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	On the ways to test for fever.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When the eyelids of the patient are red by their natural appearance and wrinkled, then open your eyes to the heat and produce ways for fever: such as if it is caused by fire, which is called fire-touching, and treat it with four methods: either by fire, or with acute medicine, according to what has been said in the chapter on cauterization; or by incision and suturing, or with reeds, according to sight.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And then place the patient' head in his hand and turn his eyelids toward you, and if they turn: it is good; and if not, pierce that with a sharp needle at the point where they should be turned upward from the eyelid, and let the needle go through it — close to the edge of the eyelid — and close to the hairs, and pull the hair up above the eyelid, and turn that back toward you.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And then turn the eyelid inside out by its hairs, and place a small piece of cloth or a needle on it, and tie it: and then turn that over with your fingers, and see if there is a figure like a leaf of mint.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	However, sometimes it is the opposite: because the amount of air that enters through the eye is different in each person, because there are those who have their eyelids opened by a large quantity, and this causes them to open their eyes more; and there are those whose eyelids are closed tightly by a small amount.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And then open it with the point of the needle between the two lines that you have drawn, and start from the lacrimal major into the lacrimal minor.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	If your wound is wide as the hair is natural: because it is the size of a king.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And then place an ointment in one of the angles of the cloth, and scratch that completely; and adjust the two sides with a small, fine thread, and wipe the blood, and make it adhere to some hair on the eyebrows for a few causes, if you want to do so, and if not, do not worry about it.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And then leave the threads to heal within three or four days, and then treat that wound.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	If you want to: leave the stitch in place, and treat that with water that dries it out and hardens it because the eyelid is raised by the seal of the wound and the addition of it; however, if the stitch comes out: then say these words about the medicine.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	But when it is on top of the patient, it is a good operation and not in fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And another way to tie it is that you hold on top of the eyelid with such a thread, and pull up the eyelid with three separate and gathered threads according to this form:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	If it is not possible there, hold the nails, and if it does not close, take a needle with thread in it and put it into the middle of the figure, and stick the other thread on top of the major tear, and the second thread according to the smaller tear, and adjust between these threads to make them equal, and then lift them up with your hand with an upward bend: lift all the string
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then adjust the two eyelids with stitches, and heal the cut inside that is healed.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	If it happens that the swelling has formed a scar or a crack, then put on it a balm and something similar to it, and moisten it.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And some eyes also to the eyelid that their pupils are turned in, then when you use that which we have said of stitches; but stitches on each are more artificial.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	Do not tie the string with a knot, according to this form:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	and that you rotate the eyelid and cut the figure inside according to what I have said; and then with art make two needles or two thin wires of which length is according to the length of the eyelid and their width is less than the width of the spine:
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	Then you have already cut into the ends of any splits, where you have the strings.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Then add to it a little bit of the thread that is extra on top of the eyelid, and tighten the needles on each split with a very tight knot, and leave it for some days, because the string through the tightness will die away and rot.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	If it is delayed, then break it off with a tweezers, and heal the wound inside that is healed.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	So when it is solidified, the eyelid is raised, and the hair does not poke.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the form of two needles that you will make according to this form:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and there is no quantity of length or width more or less.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter 12.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	Of raising hair on the spine with a needle when the hair is hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When the hair is unnatural, hard and sharp on the spine, then the operation in it is that you take a very thin needle and pause it on the string of a very thin silk, and then adjust the ends of it and tie each one with a very small knot:
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And be the length of the strings of the quantity of a palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	Then you make another very thin string and cross it over, and tie the ends of that one if you want to.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	Then place the patient's head on the table with his face down, and bring the operation to a good conclusion, because it is a delicate and small operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	Then insert the needle into the root of the hair with care and attention, and make it penetrate quickly into the eyelid, removing that from the natural hair.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	Then pull the hair out of its root and introduce that into the eye, and be the hair one or two or three or no more than that.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	Then pull your hand away from it so that the hair comes out of its root into the eye, with the hair attached to the eyelid with the natural hair.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	If it is pulled out from the eye and not pulled out with the hair, you will pull out from the split ends with the thread that you have put on it, within which the hair will be pulled out from above.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	Then you will see the spine clearly, because then you will pull out from the eye and the thread, and tighten each one and close it for two or three days, so that the hair sticks to its place and grows over it.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	If it is too loose, then you adjust a long hair of the natural hair, and raise that one, or what you leave within that space, and then you raise it.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter 13.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	Of the treatment of a bump on the eyelid.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When there is a bump in the spine and it is hard to close the eyelid when it closes on both sides by bad consolidation of the wound or by sectioning or cauterizing, and this is called leporine, and that one is either natural or accidental, and is done for the consolidation of the wound or by sections or cauterization, or by a similar shape to those with which it does not agree.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Then the way of doing the operation is that you split those consolations and separate the eyelids, and pause them between those a piece of cloth of linen, and tie them together so that they are healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And do not use any cure for the causes that dry out, because if you make water return to be swollen, it is better than nothing and does not burn when it comes into contact with the fire.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Then use on that bump of causes that soften with fenugrec, and dip in the water which is hot and salty and similar to it, or rub aquilon, which is made liquid with some oils, and dip it in that water, and heal it.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the treasure of your cure is that you make perfect those consolations that are not consolidated according to the form that comes into contact with fire at the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation that we have described is nothing but a correction of cauterization that does not return to the shape of the wound according to how it comes into contact with fire at the beginning.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter 14.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	Of the treatment of a bump on the eyelid.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This cauterization that is done on the eyelid below, which is called specifically only when it is done on the side of the eye and not in other places, and it is either natural or accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	May be accidental due to a wound, sectioning, cauterizing, or similar shapes.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	And the way of doing the operation is that you take a needle with a double thread, and make it pass from the tear duct on the left side to the tear duct on the right side, within which the thread comes to the ends of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	Then stretch the flesh with the needle and draw it through both ends with the needle, and cut it with a wide knife.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	Then if the eyelid returns to its place as it should, then do so; but if not, take the string and pause it in the middle of the split, and adjust the eyelids so that the two splits are at the ends of the eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And make the ends of the two splits at two angles of the incision, which is done so that they meet, and let them be done so that when they are gathered together they form a figure.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is Greek letter: Lambda.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	Then stretch that flesh by the quantity that is the width of the eyelid on both sides, which holds the eyelid closed.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	Then adjust those separated parts and cut them with a thread of wool, and heal those with water that we have said about the softening medicines and with salt within that is healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	If the cauterization is done in a crack or stitch or cauterizing, then you have to split that flat crack on top of the eyelid according to what came before it.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And separate the hair from between the two lips as we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the sum of the speech of the cure of alcohol if it is dry or left, that runs in it operation, according to which is prepared in the form of alcohol, and that is in a form of various particles.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the artisans know at all times how to prepare it in any way that is possible inside so that it returns the figure to its natural form or close to it, and this malady according to which suits it from the operation and instruments in the greater dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter .XV.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	Of the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation occurs in men who are solid the eyelid over the eye socket and is prohibited from the ease of movement and its natural works, so far as you enter the extremities of the ray you leave the eyelid, and raise that, or extend that to the unction.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And you cut the adhesion to a thin blade, which is not to the sharpness of the incisions, holding obtuse a little so that this malady is not disturbed from the operation, and remain the blade that does not damage the eye by its sharpness.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And be your incision which releases that adhesion with ease inside so that it is returned the eyelid according to its natural form and that is healed all the adhesion.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And you put in the eye salt water with which you wash; or distill in it of Zuni dissolved in water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And separate between the eyelid and the eye with two fingers, and place over the eye wool infused in album of wine, and then third day use from causes of consolidation inside that is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter  .XVI.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	Of incision of unguent and of eminence of flesh of the lacrimal.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	You know that unguent is according to two ways, because it is either nervous, and seems like a hard subtle ciphac; or is not nervous, like white frozen humidity, which when it touches the blade, or must be forced to take a piece, is separated, and the piece does not remain on it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both spices do not begin until from the lacrimal major that goes little by little that covers the vision and prohibits light and the movement of eye.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	May the way of working in the incision is that this malady pause its head on the floor, and return the eyes to you. And open the eyelids, and raise the eyelid to you, and collect the unguent with two drops, and extend that to the extremities above it.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And take an arrow and insert it into that hair of horse or ox or cow, or of the same, or of the fat solid, or double the extremities of the arrow little by little and keep that in the middle of the unguent, and pierce that with the arrow, and bind the unguent to the fat thread; and extend that to the extremities above it, and cut off with the blade a little hair from the edge of the unguent which severs the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And so you follow that with the hair inside behind of it.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And you cut the romance in the roots of the lacrimal with a thin blade or with small scissors, and allow the flesh of the lacrimal natural that does not involve continuous flow of tears by incision of that.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And some times the unguent with salt oil extended or with fat, so far as it has said, and return the blade of lion that this is the form of it:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And you take care that with the blade do not touch the corneal skin and that is involved in its rupture, and that the pupil is pierced.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And the incision cuts in the eye a little salt mixed or very well dried, and leaves that inside for another day; and care that this water is not involved inside that is healed.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	If the unguent is not nervous and you cannot put the blade, or does not remain in that onci, then take this kind of unguent that is treated with medicines, and heal that way with eye and recommend it in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	If you want to cut that, then you open the eyelids of this malady and take a blade of lion sharpened according to this form:
am subtilitat.	in subtlety.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	If that is rarefied and is constricted and taken in that root, then distil it from your hour in the eye of very well dried or very well dried salt, and close the eye inside for another day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And repeat the operation on that inside that is refreshed all that it is from him, but the opposite does not stop cauterizing it in the eye, because then you leave that, and heal at first the apostema inside that is healed.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And repeat your operation on that with reason so that is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The eminence of the lacrimal flesh, if you notice it in the eye by great damage, should be suspended with unguent; and cut that from that one, and do not complete the incision so that does not involve continuous flow of tears.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And distill in the lacrimal eye very well dried within that is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter  .XVII.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	Of incision of algazardenic and of water that is born of flesh adjusted in the eye.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Some times in the eyelids of eye is born the flesh that is dried up, and it is overlaid inside that covers the pupil, or comes near to join or separates on both sides and is assembled at a rock of pillar.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	May the operation in it is that this malady pause its head on the floor; and return the eyelids of that and collect all that flesh with two convenient scissors to water, and hold that water with one forcep or with basket; and cut off the flesh at first so that is finished with incisions, and take care of the eye that does not involve that in your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And be your incision at which you cut those or with a blade that we have said in the incision of unguent, or with small scissors at which is collected as required according to the form of it that is appropriate to this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Therefore, when your incision is completed and all that flesh is refreshed, then fill the eye with salt dried up or distill in it powder that seems to be of corrosive medicines, and place over the eye below with album of wine so that is secured from the apostema cauterizing it.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	If some cause of algardenic is present and is constricted cauterizing it, and fears apostema cauterizing it, then leave the eye and heal that apostema with water so that involves that apostema, and repeat the operation on that within that is healed, and seems according to this form in the flesh adjusted that occurs in the eye of this type.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	May, however, you know that you remove all the cure of eye flesh by way natural or by way accidental, with iron, and do not put your hand in any of these operations within you see that this member is suffering from that operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter  .XVIII.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	Of collection of knowledge in the eye.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Such as veins that are dried up on the eye and prohibit from the vision of your operation, and distil the eye over a period of days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore, at the beginning, you need to consider if the eye in which is dried up is strong and in it is not another malady that is dried up, then collect that knowledge.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And is that you order this malady to pause its head on the floor, and suspend those veins with a drop or two according to your prudence; and be that drop of unguent according to this form:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	Then he should take two ounces of this liquid according to this method:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	Then carefully gather those small veins together with tweezers and gently remove them hour by hour until the blood stops flowing from the vein; otherwise the blood will pool in the wound and the person may become infected.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And be sure that you do not cut the blood vessels at the ends of the foot; and if your operation is in front of the sun, and hold it firmly during your operation so that you only cut those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	Then once you are finished, then you should boil the blood with vinegar or ale so that it becomes thicker and less likely to spread;
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	But if that is not possible for you to collect all of it in one hour, then you should squeeze the blood as much as possible until it stops flowing; and leave it for several days until the pain has subsided and the wound has healed completely.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	Then repeat this process a second time, but only if necessary, until it is cured.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the shape of the scissors:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	On reduction of hernia to the nose.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you treat hernias with either cauterization or acute medicine according to the description given above and it does not heal, then do not use surgery on it unless you cut open the swelling and remove all the contents within it, and extract all the fluid, leaving only dry matter;
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the bone is exposed or blackened due to the infection, then you should use an instrument which has this shape:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	It is called a sharp-tipped cap, and it is made of iron, and the tip is rounded like this with a sharp point made by grinding or a sharp edge made by filing (as in the following figure).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	Then place it over the infected area of the bone, and carefully rotate it between your fingers, gently pressing your hand towards the center to make sure that the infection is completely removed.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And you should then make a few cuts with a sharp knife, and then apply an astringent or a drying agent to the area.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	Then if the wound is well-healed and the skin is good and the blood vessel has been cut off from the wound by means of a bandage or cloth for ten days, and there is no swelling or infection and nothing happens to it, then you know that it is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	Otherwise, unless the second bone is exposed or infected by acute medicine, and if it is exposed, then you should use this method:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	The upper part of the iron triangle should be placed on the edge of the bone at that end, and the point of the knife should touch the end of the bone, so that there is no space between them;
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	Then place it over the bone, and keep your hand near the lacrimal; then gently press your hand towards the edge of the bone, and with a slight movement of your hand, feel around to make sure that it does not hurt; and if it hurts when you touch it, then stop and do not use this method.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Then apply astringent medicines to dry the area.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Then if the wound heals well, the matter that was shed at the edges should return to the nose, and then pour the liquid over the wound.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	On reduction of a swelling on the liver.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the liver has swollen completely and nothing happens to it, then you should massage it gently, and then if there are no signs of improvement or swelling, then you should use oil which has been made into a paste with ash, salt, and vinegar; and then place this over the liver with a cloth, and cover the area with a warm compress. Then apply a poultice to the liver using a powdery substance.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And for the powder you should take sheets of linen, and each sheet should be folded in four, and these folds should be made into a thick substance.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	Then place this powder on the liver over the other layer of cloth, according to how much is needed for the liver.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	Then bind this tightly with a sturdy cloth, and repeat the process of applying the warm compress; then remove the cloth after an hour, and allow the liver to rest while covering it with a cloth.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	But if the liver becomes soft during this time, then be careful; do not use too much pressure when binding it.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	Then remove the cloth after an hour, and allow the liver to rest while covering it with a cloth.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	If the liver has already been reduced in size, then that is good; otherwise, repeat the process of applying the poultice, stricture, and warm compress until it heals.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	On incisions into a swelling on the eye socket.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When there is a swelling on the eye socket and it disturbs the skin of the eyelid, and with a sharp knife cut along the edge of the eyelid, and then cut through the inner corner of the eye, cutting through the soft parts of the eye; then carefully remove any of the soft parts that are stuck to the eye; and if there is an obstruction in the eye's pupil, then open it with your finger or a thin blade, and take out the blockage; then cut along the edge of the eyelid again, and fix the lid back into place, holding it firmly.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	Then remove the blade or needle, and place it over the eye socket with a little bit of sheep's wool soaked in milk; then leave it for a moment before removing it.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	Then care for the patient with warm water to make sure that he is comfortable and his pain is relieved.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	On certain parts of the body a circular band of cloth should be placed around the swelling, and it should be pierced with a sharp needle that enters the skin very gently; then the liquid from the swelling should run onto the palm, and the person should wash their hands.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	Then bind it securely until it heals.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De curacio de alconati.	On treatment for eye problems.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This malady, which is called conjunctivitis, is not a disease of the liver; it is a disease of the eye, resembling running water, and it has no relation to the liver.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	The treatment for this disease is to massage the eyelids gently and to apply a cold compress; then keep your hand near the edge of the eye, and if you feel any pain, then stop and do not use this method.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	If it does not come down, then know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	If it is not prepared for the descent of the disease with water, then use a sharp needle to pierce between your fingers and carefully insert it into the eye, looking at the front part of the conjunctiva, where the blood vessel enters; then remove the disease without touching the transparent part of the eye.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Then when it is removed, then you should boil the blood with honey or water that you have already mixed with fennel seeds and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	Then carefully inspect the rest of the body for any other causes, until it is cured.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	On treatment for blood that comes from the liver.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already mentioned the spices of water in the division and how they agree to pierce with sound; then follow this treatment for blood that comes from the liver:
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Then you should massage the eyelids gently between two fingers and place a cold compress on the liver; then cover it with a cloth, and leave it for an hour.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And place your right hand near the eyelid of his left eye, if the eye is on the left side; or your left hand, if the eye is on the right.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And place your right hand over his right eye, if the eye is left-sided; or your left hand, if the eye is right-sided.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And place the tip of the finger near the corner of the eye, over the eyelid, along the width of the brow bone from the tear gland, and gently push the eyebrow up with your hand.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And insert the finger into the eye socket and feel that the eye has been reached by the touch of the finger.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And note the distance between the edge of the iris and the end of the dark ring, for this is the height of the pupil at its full opening; and you will see that the pupil's visual field is determined by the clarity of the cornea.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And place the finger into the opening where the water is, and then another servant should hold a mirror up; if the water falls quickly, then the patient' eye is open; but if it does not, then the patient has a closed eye.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And pause for a moment; and if the water falls slowly, then you should hold up the mirror before the eye; and when the finger is taken out, then the patient' eye will be open.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And if it stops falling and does not fall again, then you should take the finger out easily, and gently rotate it towards the patient' face, and dip the tip in clear salt solution from a gem; and then rinse the eye with the solution, and place your hand over the eye; and wait until the water comes out of the eye.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	May this not be known except by those who have lived in these times, and may they be written down for future generations.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if, because of the hardness of your eye, you do not obey the finger placed on your eyelid—for there are some men for whom the eyelid is very hard—then consider the following form of words:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	Then pierce it at that point with a fine needle, and do not stop until the finger has passed into the eye socket.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And place the finger in quickly, as I have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And you should give the credit for this work to your servant who is staying in a dark house, and not allow any movement at all.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And wait for the nature of the water to be changed so that its taste becomes pleasant, and do not let your hair touch either side at any time.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And may this agreement hold good for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And remove it from that dark house and examine the sight carefully, and then return the finger within the day. vii.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And do not allow anyone to touch the water in the time of cleaning or to dip the finger into it.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	While you are holding water away from your eyes, because the water will spread freely and quickly over your face due to its great force and intensity.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	May this not happen again, unless it is within seven days; and if it does, then examine the eye carefully with water that has been left to settle for a while.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	And then you should carefully wash the face with water, and wait for a few days before examining it again in that dark house.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And remove any trace of dirt from the face carefully and converse about the causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And know that it is not an excuse for any vision problems; and you should be careful with the procedure.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And some of these have been brought to us by the hand of Artaxerxes, and some say that it is fire in the eye; when the finger is inserted into the eye, water comes out.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	However, there is a kind of water in our country that has been perfected and which makes one's eyes clear; and it may well be that this water can heal the blinded eye.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of medicines which should not be taken by those who do not know them:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	They should be made from iron or from lead, and these are the extremes of this triangular mixture: the sharp end, such as that which is used for cutting; the soft end, such as that which can be pressed into a mold; and the middle part, such as that which is rolled out like paper.
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter XXVII.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	Of meat there shall be none in the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When various kinds of meat are hidden in the nose, and there is a cause for it which gathers together scorpions of different sizes, or a wart that resembles one; this disease is called warts, because it does resemble one.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And from him comes cancerous meat, a lump, of a fawn-like color; and from him comes meat like that of a lion, not of a fawn-like color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Then in that meat which is neither fraudulent nor cancerous, place your hand on the sun and then cut the palm; and pierce the tip of the finger with a fine needle in those meats.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And remove it from the sides carefully, and cut off with a fine knife that part which has been reached by the needle; and if for any reason the cutting is not enough, then you should take a small, sharp instrument, such as an awl, and pierce it through to the other side.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	May this not happen again unless it is due to an accident; and if it is a malicious apoplexy, then examine carefully to find the cause and cut off all the parts affected by it; and let the holes be covered so that no wound is left behind.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And place the finger in the nose carefully, and then wash it with water or with vinegar.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	May this not be a cold nose; and if you notice moisture in the palate, then you will know that it is already healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	May this not be the case; then you will know that there is nothing inside it except flesh and bones; for no cutting has been done to those parts of the nose.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Then wait until the finger has been inserted into the nose completely; and then feel carefully for the third time between each of the nostrils, and note the quantity of the touch; and place your hand on the nostril that needs attention and then pierce it with a fine needle to the side; and if this does not help, then examine carefully and cut off what is needed.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And when the water has been left to settle, so that it reaches the nostrils, and if its odor is pleasant to the taste buds; then it should touch your palate, for many children suffer from this problem in school; and it may be a cause of this, which you can try to find out by doing.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	And place the two extremities of the finger at opposite ends, one projecting outside the nose and the other inside; and then hold it together carefully, and if it is not enough, then place a small needle on the tip; and pierce it into the nose to the side where you need it, for you will know that the flesh has already been reached by the needle.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	And remove the finger from the nose carefully; and place it on the nose for the third time, or more, until the cutting is done completely; and if this does not help, then examine carefully and cut off what needs to be cut off.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And remove the finger from the nose carefully; and place it in the ear for a short time, so that it is cured completely.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	May this not be an excuse; then use the above remedy.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And here is the form of the medicine that purifies and makes clear the nose:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you want, make a closed tube from cane, and the tube of the instrument with a flat, exposed tip; handle it by its end, which holds the liquid or water that you want to drain from the pus and from the causes that cause them.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And these are precious: get of beaver, of white balsam, of ginger, of yellow mustard seed, of long pepper, of elderberry, and of spice anun. You come with blood and pus, and pills are made, and one pill is given in drinkable water, and it is swallowed whole, and it is thrown up into the patient's narrows while facing away from them.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter .25.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	And cut off their tips at the ends of the nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	If there are any bumps on the tips of the nose, they should be cut off and the area cleaned and monitored for several days to determine if there is any inflammation.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And by water that you pour on it in the beginning of its appearance, and leave all of it.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	Then place a hot cauterization or burning medicine on the spot where it is located.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	If it is delayed for a long time before it is magnified, consider whether it is hard, of dark color and little feeling, then do not touch that with a sharp iron, because if there are any bumps on the tip of the nose, consider that it is due to a great evil in that area of the nose.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the pustule is a soft touch and not of dark color, and when it is possible to cut all of it, then empty the patient' and cut out that part with fear, and cure the area with water that washes and soothes it until it heals.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter .26.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	Of surgery on the nose, lips, and ear when the continuity is broken by plague or similar.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	Know that when surgery to repair continuity occurs in one of these cartilage pieces, it is only done on a few people.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	So then, when there is any cause of those, consider whether it is a fresh plague and if so, give it the sanctum, and then adjust the two lips of the plague with surgery, and then cure that within until it heals.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the lips of the solution for continuity are already separated, and each is healed separately, then consider whether there is any break in their cord, and within that, give it a sanction.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then adjust the two lips with surgery and strengthen them, and spray on them the sanctum of dragon and salt water, and put a thin layer of plaster on them, or some other type of hardening plaster, and leave it alone for two or three days, then remove it and replace the plaster, and let it dry out within until it heals.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	The method of surgery is that you add the solution for continuity or with needles as described in the suturing of the abdomen, or add the solution for continuity with thread as described above.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter .27.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	Of extracting those causes that come between the two lips inside.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	If there are any bumps inside the two lips of some people, they resemble hard lumps to the color of fat, and some of them are small and some are large.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Then consider whether you can convert those two lips and close each of those硬块 entirely, and within that, dip the place with a strong salt water, then wash it with soap, and cure the area with water that is slightly bitter, until it heals.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	Of cutting into the flesh that is fitted to the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	The small white bumps on the gum flesh that is fitted are due to a soft thing, so consider whether you have it with a sharp knife or have it cut off with scissors and remove those that have it, then let the blood flow or give it the sanctum.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	Then place a dry salt water or another type of stinging powder on the spot.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if that flesh returns, then cut it off again in a second operation, because the cauterization will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter .29.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	Of reasons for teeth to be sharp.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When on the surface of teeth in the middle and between the gums are fitted smooth edges, sharp corners, and some are dark red and become yellow or green within until the gum bleeds when water runs through it, and some teeth are sharp.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And so then, if you do not see the patient's back between their teeth and stop the edge of the tooth with your hand, and rub the teeth where those sharp edges appear, resembling sand within until it does not cause any pain, and if there is a dark color or yellow or green, then that is due to the gum running water.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	Then if it is later water that is found in those at the beginning of the reason, then do not repeat the reason; otherwise, you should repeat the reason on those at another day and again on the third day until you find a final answer in that which you want to know.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	Know that teeth require different types of tools and shapes depending on how they are prepared for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And for this reason, the edge of the tooth that is cut from the middle inside is different from the edge of the tooth that is cut between the teeth depending on other shapes; and these shapes of razors are always prepared which you will soon see:
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter 30.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	Of root extraction from teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	Then consider whether you can cure the pain of the tooth entirely and with patience, as there is no reason to delay the extraction of the tooth when it is due for extraction, because the substance is sublime within until it causes an excuse in the extraction of the tooth.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	Then consider whether you can extract that tooth forcibly and firmly, and if it is painful for the patient to extract that tooth, as has been shown by experience that pain stops when the tooth is completely extracted, because there is no reason to delay extracting a tooth that needs to be extracted.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Then consider whether you can be certain which is the painful tooth, and if you know that for sure, then consider whether you can cut into the path of the tooth with a sharp knife in the place where there is no value, until it is completely dissolved from the gum at the beginning, and then cut off that tooth slowly bit by bit, until it breaks off.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	Then place a strong and sharp force between the teeth that you have to extract it without breaking it, and then extract that tooth slowly, until it breaks off; do not hit it hard or with your hands, as this may cause pain, but use a gentle and slow extraction method.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And if it is not a loose tooth, then take one of those instruments, and put that under the tooth completely with ease, and try to remove it slowly as you would at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	If the tooth is loose or worn away, then consider whether you can fit a string around that tooth and tighten it at the end of the string completely without stretching it at the time of your extraction; do not use any sharp things to cut into that tooth as this may cause pain.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And when you make a precise incision around the entire gum, be careful to maintain your strength so that you do not break the opening of it and return over the patient for the harm that is less than the first pain of it.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And be careful that you do not spill water which the ignorant barbers in their final stage and audacity about the eradication of them, for they do not administer such water to us; because with a single stroke of a razor, great harm comes to men, and the roots of their teeth are all pulled out, or some of them, or that you extract that bone from the jaw with a single stroke of a razor, as the water-spilling witnesses.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And the eradication of it be washed with a cold or hot salt water.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if there is a flow of blood from it, as well as with a single stroke of a razor, take a certain amount of salt and spray it on the wound, and if it does not stop that blood, then cauterize it.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The shape of the forceps and tweezers is very important for the tooth to be removed at the beginning, with a long handle, a short grip, and thick tips, so that they are not bent when you have to operate with them.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And sometimes with wide handles so that when you first use them they are not bent, but with short tips.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And they are made of iron from India, with very short tips, and at the end of them are teeth that some are shorter than others and tighten strongly, and some of those tips have the shape of a bird's beak, which is sharp, and they are of strong contraction.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter .31.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	Of the eradication of teeth and the breaking of bones from the mandibles that are broken.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you have to extract a tooth that is broken in two, then know that you pause on the spot for a day or two until it softens; and if you insert tweezers or needles at the end of them, which are assembled like the beak of a bird, called ciconia or guant
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	And at the end of them are made with a file or alfinete.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if you do not obey your doctor with these tweezers or needles, then know that you cut off the root and extract the instrument which has the name of an awl, so it is a small lever whose shape is as follows:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And have a very thick tip and not be embedded so that it does not break.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	Therefore, if the root is poked out, it is good; and otherwise, help yourself with these other instruments, whose shapes are as follows: The first instrument has a triangular shape at the end, with some thickness:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The shape of the second instrument is that it be triangular and have two thin tips.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And you are helped with these instruments, having two ramps whose shape is as follows: the ramp of the lever has the following shape:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	And with other instruments which will precede in the shaving of teeth; for this instrument is easily made with an awl, and it is as follows:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	of the triangular shape with a curved or short tip, which has some thickness, and not be embedded so that it does not break.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And you should know that the dental instruments are similar to other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	May the crafters be wise and subtle in their art, invent new methods for themselves according to what they have learned from others; because there are different types of harm that the little ones did not know or stop using their instruments due to the shapes of various species.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	May the doctor carefully examine the broken bone in its place according to what is most appropriate for the patient from the instruments and forceps that we have mentioned in the extraction of teeth roots, and help yourself with gestures whose shape is as follows:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And be in some small thickness to small thickness, and be tightened or tied up to the mouth so that it does not run away or escape until the bone is completely poked out; and then restore the place with convenient medicines for him.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	May if there is a small hole in the bone, then break that bone from that hole and from its blackness; and heal it within so that it is healed.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter.32.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	Of the treatment of prominent teeth compared to other teeth.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When prominent teeth are not in line with the natural course of their peers, and this is more the case with female teeth, and even more so with elderly women's teeth; then know that if a tooth is not next to another tooth, and it cannot be extracted by sawing or piercing it, then cut it off; but if it is not attached to any other tooth, then use the following instrument whose shape is as follows: it resembles a pig's ear, and it is made of iron with a very sharp tip.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And be your incision which you make with the following instrument in two days because of the hardness of the tooth, and that it is not connected to any other teeth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the prominent tooth is extended by sawing, then saw it with a file of iron from India whose shape is as follows:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And all of it is made of iron from India and the point is very sharp; and let it be made with a file whose shape resembles needles, and with which the tooth is gradually shaved in two days' time with ease, so that it is not connected to any other teeth by cutting it off.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And then cut that line with a sharp knife, and break that tooth with very small razors.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if it is a tooth that one side is broken and the other side is whole, then know that you saw off that part of it which is open and curved, and make it flat so that the tongue does not lick it or the word is corrupted.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter.33.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	Of the restoration of broken teeth with gold or silver fillings.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When there is a blow or impact on the teeth, and the patient cannot stop bleeding, and you have treated it with stinging medicines, and it has not worked, then know that gold fillings do not break as easily as silver fillings; because silver fills do not break for a long time, but gold fillings break soon after they are put in; however, gold does not corrode over time.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And be the filling in such a subtlety and thickness according to how much it can enter between the teeth; and the shape of the filling is that you take the filling and put double its size between two healthy teeth, and then if it breaks into two parts, it will reach half the size of the two filled teeth, or if there is one tooth filled, until the thread reaches the healthy tooth on the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And then repeat the process to the other half of the tooth, and strengthen your hand with ease and skill until it does not break.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And be your structure with which you strengthen the filling so that the roots of the teeth do not run away.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And then cut off the excess filling with tweezers or pincers, and add what is necessary to the place, and convert those that are visible into small holes between the healthy tooth and the filled tooth, so that they do not hurt the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And then leave that one stretched with a string.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	May if it is broken or damaged, strengthen it with another filling at the right time.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the form of teeth and figure of the correction of two healthy teeth and two bad ones, so such as these:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when one tooth is to be returned, or two, put them in their places again as they have been broken, and let them stay there.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	But he does not make this except a good artisan and a wise man.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And some are apt for a certain cause of cows' bones; and is done to them so as the form of teeth, and is placed in the place where the tooth fails, and is strengthened so as we have said, and remain and serve them up for long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter.XXXIV.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	Of the incision of the ligament which is seen in the tongue, and forbids talking.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament which is seen leaving the tongue some are natural to a man, or by chance and happens because of a plague which has already been consolidated.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation on it is that one opens the patient's mouth, his skull existing in the middle of the jaw; and raises his tongue, and cuts this nervous ligament according to its depth so as not to tear the tongue from its recency.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	But if in that there is any hardness or denudation, and it stands because of the consolidation of the plague, then you cut one once and cut this according to its depth so as not to tear the ligament and be dissolved the nodulation.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And keep that there is no fracture made in the preon of the flesh, so as to cut here iron and bring out flux from the vein.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	And be washed the trace of the incision with clean water or with salt water or with a rubbing of water; and place away the tongue in a way that it not consolidated another time.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	But if there is a flow of blood, place over the site vitriol three times; but if the blood flows, then cauterize the site with a caustic which is given to water.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And take care that it be cured with other causes before it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter.XXXV.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	Of the extraction of a whelk from the tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Some happen naturally that leaves the tongue swollen like a small dumpling, prohibiting the tongue from its natural operation; and is strong enough that it fills the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the operation on it is that one opens the patient' s mouth between his teeth and looks at the swelling.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you see a dark or black color in it, and is hard, and the patient does not feel pain, then do not touch it, for it is rough.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it is white, in which there is moisture, then you put the oil on it, and cut this with a fine scalpel, and cut all off; and if blood flows at the time of your operation, then you pause with three clean finger tips, so as it is vitriol, within that it stop the blood.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And return to your work within that you have treated it with respect, within that it is washed with salt water and vinegar; and take care that it be cured with another cure before it is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter.XXXVI.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	Of the extraction of an abscess of two ears, and of that which is nothing in the hole, and of other abscesses.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When the abscess is close to a gland, and it is swollen like an apple, which has happened suddenly, and are called two ears, which when you treat them with water that we have said in the division, and they do not heal, then examine whether the abscess is hard, dark-colored, and does not feel pain; then do not touch it with iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is red in color and the root is large, then do not touch that with iron for fear of the blood flowing; but leave that until it has matured, and then either pull it out, or cut it off yourself.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is white in color, soft, and the root is thin, then that should be cut out.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the operation on it is that you examine, before your operation, whether it has remained stationary or has decreased by any diminution; and then put the patient between his teeth, facing towards the sun, and opens his mouth, and place servants before him, holding the patient' s tongue away with a noble instrument of which this is the form:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	It should be made of silver or of brass, and should be thin with a sharp edge.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	Then place your fingers on that, and show it to you the abscess, and put oil on that, and let it rest in the crease, and pull it apart outward as much as you can.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Another water which takes away any cause of the tunics, and then cut that with an instrument of which this is the form:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	And is joined with tweezers, however its ends are sharp, so that the hole of each of them is in the end of the other, very sharp, which should be made of iron tempered.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	But if this instrument is not at hand to you, then cut it with a scalpel of which this is the form: It should be sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And then when you have cut one notch, cut the other according to this method of cutting, and then cut the tongue of the patient with a sharp knife.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if there is a flow of blood, wash that with water boiled with sage or with a leaf of mint; and take care that the blood be stopped before it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And some happen naturally in the hole, other abscesses besides these two ears, and cut them according to this method of cutting two notches, making one notch sharp and the other not sharp.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And I have already cured a woman of an abscess which was born in her hole, which abscess was red in color, and did not feel pain, and this woman had closed the hole in her hole, and she breathed normally, and had forbidden herself to eat or drink water, and would have died if it had not been treated.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	The abscess was already so great that it had filled two pockets within her.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	Then I hid my face in a fold of cloth, and put my finger in one of his eyes, and threw it away from me, and took a great amount of blood, and then cut that eye out, and pulled the tongue out of the hole, and I held my finger in the mouth of the patient.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And I removed a large part of his tongue, and did not feel pain from it.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Then absolutely stopped her from drinking water, and soon I began to give her a drink, so that I did not cut that abscess into pieces for a long time, and the abscess came out in place of that one, which cut within that.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Then I gave her a drink and cauterized her mouth, then went around and did not know that God had saved me from that patient.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter.XXXVII.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	Of the incision of a hula when it is swollen.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When the hoola is swollen with catarrh, and it is long, then let it be called a lump; but if it becomes thick and round, then let it be called a bubbl.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	But when it is cured with the water that we have said in the division, and you do not feel your cure, and there is no more fever after it has stopped, and it is red in color or black, and does not feel like a hundred degrees to you, then let it be cut out which is aggregated round; but if it is long, and bleeds, of dark or black color, and feels like a hundred degrees to you, then let it be cut out with an instrument.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you see the second manner that I have described of his whiteness and length, that you make the patient lie down and press his tongue to the instrument with which he will mold his form and fit the nails in the new, and pull those down and carve them with one of two instruments that you call in the incision of two melas.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And where it is not suitable to carve that which is placed on the natural term of its addition, because if you carve too much of him, you will prevent his speaking.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And he shall make the incision, use what I have recommended in the incision of two melas, and he will heal him within so that it is healed.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the patient is frightened by the incision of him, where he uses engineering in the cauterization of him, his cauterizing manner in him is only with sharp water, and it is because you pause the head of the patient on his thigh, and press his tongue to the instrument which we have said, and from the water which we have described in the cauterization chapter, fill that one alive, and pause that not thick or thin, and from that fill the cavity of the instrument with which this is the shape:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	Be the extremity of him who is paused medicine in his cavity like the cavity of a spoon, and pause the instrument on his uvula, and the patient will bite on his tongue so that saliva or mucus comes out of his mouth by the medicine inside, so that he does not send it down from there for any cause over his throat and so that he does not choke.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And bring your hand close to the medicine, and squeeze that one over the uvula for a space of half an hour within which he will be blackened and softened by the biting of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you want, take hold and wrap that one around the extremity of him, and dip the hold in the medicine, and put that one into a tube from above so that the hold adheres to that tube, and make it so often as you wish to cauterize the uvula, and let that one be because it will dry up and fall after three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you wish to repeat the medicine, repeat that one, and let the cauterization be washed in the circuit of the uvula with the hold embedded in it, and rub him with that water which is in the circuit of him from the medicine, and let him be bathed with soap, and inside let him be cured with salves, and within so that he is healed.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this kind of cure is more safe than incision and longer from fear.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Some are cured with water which is more subtle than cauterization and incision, because it is healed with sub fumigation in this way: take the following herbs, calament, ysop, origano, ruda, scicados arabic, camomile, bread and similar to those of the plants, and adjust all of them or some of them in a vessel, and let them be submerged with vinegar, and boil; and let the vessel be well stirred with a ladle, and put in its place a sharp instrument of iron according to this manner; it shall be made of silver or iron.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And put the end in the patient's mouth so that the steam comes to the uvula on the quantulum, so that the uvula is covered with smoke.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And repeat on those spots that are dry, and keep in mind that you do not make this cure at the coming of the aphorisms, because it would fit too much into the aphorism, and do not make water, but rather the declaration of the aphorism of him cauterization.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	But if you do not have this instrument with you, then take a cane and put in its extremity a lid of wood, so that the patient’s mouth is closed, because the lid of the wood stops the steam from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this cure is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter LXVIII.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	On Extracts from Thorns and Water that Sticks in the Throat and Other Causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Spots sticking in the throat or any other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	And then extract water that appears from it, on which the sight falls, because you press the tongue to the instrument in front of the sun, so that your water is declared in the throat.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And water that does not appear to your sight in the throat, where you make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because it fortifies the cause of the throat by vomiting; or if the patient swallows a piece of nap, or a piece of raisin from lettuce, or a piece of bread dry; or take a dry sponge of marine leon and wet that strongly with water, and put it to the patient’s mouth, because when it reaches the place where thorns are stuck, then it is thrown out, because when you extract it, it is as if you had thrown yourself away.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And then take a snake and grip it by the tail, and extract it; or take a pig and grip it by its tail, and extract it; or take an ass and grip it by the tail, and extract it.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	But if you do not throw those causes away that I have said, then use an instrument of lead according to this form:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And be thicker than a spoon is small, and in the extremity of him make the cavity which you enter into his throat with ease.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And hold his head up, and keep in mind that the touch of his jaw with the throat, so that it does not hurt him, because he bites or spits it out, or because it hurts him.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	But the patient who inserts himself is better, because of his knowledge of the place of the cause annexed and he sticks in the place, and pulls his hand to the instrument on him, all according to the quantity that is prepared for him so that it does not hurt.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter LIX.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	On Extracting Blood from a Throat Ancillary.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When blood is extracted with water that I have described in the division of the cure with medicines and does not confess, then consider in the patient's throat to the sun, because you have moved the patient's tongue to the instrument which I have told you.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Then if you see blood, extract it with a small handful or a subtle gesture gently.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if you cannot extract it with that, then take a concave tube and put it in the patient' throat, and hold a hot iron in the cavity of the tube, and make as many times as the blood is dead and has stopped in the throat (and no more) and abstain from drinking water for all the day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	And then take a bowl full of rubbing water, and work the patient' mouth in it, and wash his mouth with it; and do not eat anything from that blood and drink water after an hour or two with his hand, because the blood will taste soon.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	But if the blood is not thrown out with water that I have described, then sub fumigate the patient with cimert or assafetida by the instrument which I have described in the sub fumigation of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Make water, and so in both ways.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And it is another way of operating in sub fumigation of that water, is that you take a vessel in which are carbo ignites and the vessel is covered with a cloth, and there is a hole in the middle of the cloth, and place the end of the instrument in that hole; then remove the sub fumigation from it; and hold the patient’s mouth to the end of the tube, and close his mouth so that the sub fumigation does not escape until you know that the sub fumigation is coming to the blood, because the blood soon comes.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if the cat does not drink, then you repeat the subhumid motion of the animals, abstain from drinking, eat salty foods and other things, and do not drink water, for this regime is necessary to be forgotten.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	This is the form of the instrument to extract blood from the vein when it is seen; and it is similar to tweezers, so sometimes, but because it has some curve.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	Then place the instrument on the vein, and its end is similar to an owl's beak, which is sharp, in which a piece of limestone is inserted, so that when you press it, it doesn't let go.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter.XL.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which is the sum of the speech in preparation for emesis and in section of them.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	The emetic pills are special grains, prepared in various ways, according to which one remembers them from this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And there are several ways to pierce and cut them, of which one is for the species of emetics in themselves; and by means of humidity.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second way is proper places where this happens to the body, because the emetic accident in the head is different from the emetic accident in the buttocks; and the emetic accident in the flesh is different from the emetic accident at the joint; and each of them has a treatment by means of operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	More emetic pills are some that do not require piercing, but proper drying up of the medicine in them or completion of their preparation.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	Other emetic pills are some that, when crossed, require not being dried up but proper completion of their preparation, so that they do not prolong the effect within which they can be made to act; and firm corruption of the ligaments or nerves of that joint happens, so that it causes pain in that member; or it is an emetic near a principal member, and if you delay the piercing of it, it does not mature into a sore in the principal member; or it is near the buttocks, then pierce it not fully mature, and do not wait for its complete digestion, but pierce it when it is prop to the buttocks, so that it does not prolong the effect within which it can act; and firm corruption of the ligaments or nerves of that joint happens, so that it causes pain in that member; or it is an emetic near a principal member, and if you delay the piercing of it, it does not mature into a sore in the principal member; or it is prop to the buttocks, then pierce it when it is not fully digested, and do not wait for its complete digestion.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	More cover that you know the time of piercing the emetic pill, and then it is when it is mature.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And you know that it is mature when there is a decrease in pain and fever, and a decrease in strength and pulse; and the acuteness of the head of the emetic pill, and the other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And because you know that piercing will cause pain in the place above the emetic pill and from the cure of the eminence.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And the piercing should be done at a long distance from the flesh or the body, if the emetics are near the joints of the main members or feet, and in places of the skin, nerves, and armpits; and finally, in any place that is not reflected; because in those that are reflected, use the piercing according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	More when the emetic is in a flesh place, then do not pierce it until its digestion is complete according to its preparation; because if you pierce it before that time, it prolongs the effect of the medicine within which it can act; and firm pressure happens on the lips of it, so they become hard and deep.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	More emetic pills are to be pierced according to the depth of flesh or body necessity, or according to which member digests it.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And when you administer small piercing, and in the emetic pills large large piercing and wide or several sections according to the variety of their size.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And the emetic pills are some in which you know that the rope is tied and cut when it has been long enough to mature; or those that happen in two or three days.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And of those that are not cut in section have three angles; and of those that are marked with a figure of an oak leaf, or with emetic pills of the joints.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And of them are administered circular section and lunar section, resembling those.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	More when the head is affected, and its emetic pills are superficial lions, you pierce them with a shallow piercing, or only a flat one.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And when the emetic is thick and has collected some medicine, pierce it, and do not wait to extract all of it at that time; take a small piece out, and on another day, extract a larger piece, and gradually extract it according to its graduality within which it can be acted.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	And if the patient is of virile virtue, or a female, or a small child, or an old man in decrepitude, because the animal spirit has a strong desire for the exit of the medicine, and firm pressure stops it; and you open them up.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Keep this chapter carefully guarded, and return to your piercing of these emetic pills, being careful not to cause illness; because if the emetic is small, or a flat section, then you administer a little juice of mint or mint water; and if the emetic is large, and the piercings are thin, then you pause with a needle within which both come together.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if in the emetic is cut off a piece of the rope or is crushed, then you make it up with a strong old person or a thin thread of linen, and then, when you have washed it, strengthen that within three days; and proceed to that and cure the water that covers it within which it can be acted upon.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	More if a flow of blood happens at the time of your operation, then you administer hot water and vinegar in which to soak a piece of linen cloth, and place it over the area of the flow of blood.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	More if the flow of blood persists, then you administer the regiment and treatment and powders that I have recommended in various places of this book and division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	More if it is in winter time, and the area of the emetic is an area of many nerves, then you place powder of wine or oil between them; and pause that powder on the areas.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is in summer time and the areas are flesh areas, then you place powder of wine or oil or wine and oil into them; and all this should be done within three days, as I have said; and then, when you have removed the emetic, wash it with water and vinegar, or wine and water, or both mixed together, until it is clean.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And this is the water that is necessary to know about the cure of emetics universally, more specifically according to the way of distinction; I have already said that every emetic has a specific way of being cured by individual chapters.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter.XL.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	Of the section of emetics that come in the rope of the head.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the rope of the head small emetic pills are, and they contain various kinds of seeds; and their species are:
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And there are some that are pips, and those that contain humidity similar to lemon juice.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And those that contain moisture resembling perspiration and resembling them; and those that are hard, dry.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those there is no fear, as you should the extraction of those does not cause discomfort arceria.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation in section of those is that you spray those with an instrument the form of which it brings to this way, which is called entremeses, within that you know that contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	If that water that contains moisture, then you cut it by section according to the length for superficial section according to this form:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And you start in the section of the line of .B. within to the line of .G. Then with the humidity is evacuated, then you scrape that for which contains that humidity, and do not leave of that any cause of all, since two examined returns, if remains of that any cause.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And you immerse that in Egyptian oil, if it is present, and if not, in water and salt; and you fill that with the water and leaves that within another day, since with the water it corrodes all that is removed of that film.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And you repeat that immersion in Egyptian oil second and third time if you need it, within that you trust that there was not any cause of that film; then cure the wound with oil so that it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if pus contains something greasy, then you cut that according to this form:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	in section have form of a crust, and you get up claws between two lips of the section and scrape that from all sides, and exercise your virtue in extraction of the skin which contains that.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	Perhaps if your hand causes discomfort, then you make water that you give it to me first.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And apparently you do in the pus of the section and in the cure according to what you have said; and you cut on the pus of the crust is light, since it is of little blood and of little moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And some times so of these pustules that are on the head in some men in which there is not any moisture at all; which cause is since I cut on one pustule on the head of a young woman and made it come out with a loud noise, sharp, white, which could not be opened, and if to anyone it touched, would make them ill.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	Perhaps in the other pustules accident on the head this is not this chapter, since the pustules that came to the heads of children and the roots of their ears, but the section of all these be a superficial section.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And you pause the piercing of those from the bottom part of them so that it is relieved the body of the patient to the bottom parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	Then do you cure those with water that suits to that of the cure.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter LXXII.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	Of the section of scrofulas that happen in the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	Might appear these pustules in the neck and on the shoulder and in other parts of the body; and some times they appear in all parts.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that happen in the neck, and those that are generated between them, and all scrofula of those is thin its own skin, and so as to the nodules and pustules on the head, and we have mentioned.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	The spices of these scrofula are pus, since some of them are hard, and those that contain moisture, and those that are bad, which do not respond to the cure.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	So in that which you respond of good disposition in the Treatment, of which the color of water is evident is propda to the color of the grape, and is pleasant from all sides, and does not join to the nerves of the neck, nor to the veins, nor causes discomfort, and is not swollen, then do you cut that with a superficial section from the bottom part of it to the top part of the body in the line of 3.G., within the line of  .B., and scrape that from all sides, and extract two claws, or more if necessary, just as we have said in the pustules on the head, and take out a little at a time.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is more careful not to be cut into a vein or nerve.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And be careful not to cut your hand by accident in the section or that does not agree with you in the incision, or that calms the patient, and do not make water that is not necessary to cut; since if you cut a vein or an artery and prevent you from your operation, then you pause in the wound with bitter trissate or other powders that stop the flow of blood, and start again the wound, and let it be softened the wound and begin to rot.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the blood is stopped.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Then return to your operation in which you have completed it.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And then do you ask the old saying if there is any cause of those other small scrofula, then cut those and clean those.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it is in the root of the scrofula a large vein, then you do not cut that scrofula from its root.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Before you lay that down on a soft cloth and let it rest there for itself falls off without damage.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	Then fill the wound with young oil that you have already immersed in Egyptian oil, and then cure it.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you cut that scrofula whole, then you adjust the two lips of the wound and clean it as much pus as possible without causing discomfort.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	Perhaps if you think there is excess moisture in the wound because of the size of the scrofula, then you understand to cut the root of that, and remove it, and administer a suture and water that is said.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And those scrofula that contain moisture, you make that with superficial piercing here where it appears to you the place of maturation of the patient's body, and you pause the piercing of those that have pus at the bottom part of the body, as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	Then you administer the piercing, either with oil or water, and similar to those, so that it corrods that which is rotted.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	Then when you see the wound has been cleaned, then do you cure it with oil of generation within that is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter LXXIII.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	Of the section of the pilon in the pustule accident on the forehead.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	They said that this section is good in the epileptic, and I did not see anyone in our country who had that done.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	This is the inscription of the sermon of those.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	Perhaps in men there is a tendency, and it is necessary to remove the epileptic with water, since all veins and major nerves are here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	Perhaps in those who have pustules on the mouth or on the ears, and when the epilepsy is not in the canes, then you avoid the section of the epileptic to avoid the loss that is caused by piercing.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Then when you want to cut water, do so with three circles of the epileptic, or four to a small section for width in that place that is between two circles by quantity, so that the section is in the middle, not in cartilage, and this place is suitable for section, since it is deprived of meat, and the vessels of blood of the patient are there.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the medicine is little, then you extend the edge of the forehead with a claw of two claws, and you cut that within reaching the canal, and avoid the vessels of blood if there is any cause of them.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And then cut them according to what we have described; and it is signified over the section of the channel through the flame, which is that by which it is broken up and from the absence of the voice.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	Then leave the wound open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	So that when the hour is right, in which piercing is desired, add two strips of ribbon to the wound, and cut off one alone from the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	Then administer medicines that promote the growth of new meat so that it may be healed.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And Albucasis says that the top of the incision we have described, exposure is nothing but that you see that some of these apopsies have already come out of the patient's belly, and the patient has died, and his intestines have become entangled, and some will go to cut the epiglottis so that the patient breathes over the place of the wound by some breathing, and be saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And because of this I order that the wound remain open until the evil of the evil is consumed; and the evil of it lasts for three days; and then I will order the wound to be treated, and heal it.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And so that I may see for myself, one servant took a knife and cut it into the patient' belly and cut off a piece of the cane of the lung, and I was called to the treatment of it, and I stopped the murmuring thus as it was the murmur of the wounded, and uncovered the wound and discovered the bone that was broken from the wound.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Then you confessed that it had not cut a vein nor made an incision, and the wind came out of the wound, and I healed it so that it was healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And did not happen to the servant but he suffered in his throat, and after some days he returned to the improvement of his conditions.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now I say that in the section of the epiglottis there is no danger.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 34.xliiv.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	Of the section on apopsis that happens in front of the throat, and it is called a hernia from the throat.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This apopsis, named a hernia from the throat, is great according to the color of the body, and it happens in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it has two ways, whether it is natural or whether it is accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural there is no cure.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental has two ways, one is similar to nodules that are fat, and the other is similar to an apopsis that is caused by a knot in an artery, and there is danger in it.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And I do not cover that you make a presumption of him as if he were guilty, but in the one that is small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you look at it and investigate it with care, and if you see it as nodules that are fat, and it is not suspended to any of the veins, then you cut those nodes and extract them with a knife that can cut the skin and the fur, and otherwise, then examine all of his being, and heal the place with a medicine that heals until it is healed.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 35.xliv.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	Of the section on the nodules.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	The nodules are different types, and I have already said all about their divisions in the chapter before this one.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And I cover that you make a difference between a knot and an exit with care.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Then you say that in the exit it is quality and fever and violent pains until the boiling of the superfluity is calmed; and it is complete putrefaction so that at that time the fever, the pain, and the heat cease.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	But in a nodule there is no quality or fever or pain, and it counts that it may cut the lion that is inside of him.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And it is according to the color of the body, and the beginning of it is with a knot, and it is made thus with a vacuum, and is greater or smaller, and are according to two types, whether they are fats and contain moisture, and the colors of the moisture are different, as I have said in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Then when you come to the treatment of a nodule, examine it with care using the instrument that is called an introducer, according to which its shape will be shown in the chapter that follows this one.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And this is the way of examining apopsis and all nodules, that you take this instrument and insert it into the place where you suspect something, and then turn the threads with care little by little until you know that the instrument has already penetrated the ribbon.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	Then finish your treatment according to the measure of the size of the apopsis, and then extract the introducer and consider that it is broken from its thread.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the moisture runs out, of whatever color it is, then you cut it on a superficial section, as I have said in other apopeses.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if there is no moisture from the thread's trace, then you know that it is fat.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And dry on it in a superficial section according to this form:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	as I have taught you, and suspend it with nails, and remove the ribbon from all parts with ease, and keep the skin or sack, if you can, on that nodule; and extract the sinew with care to the node.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	But if it is broken in the operation, it is not possible to extract that sinew, and there are different types of skin; then you extract them with care so that they do not break, and I will leave the rest to your discretion.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	But if it breaks any cause, little or much, the nodule returns according to its nature.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you think that any small part of it breaks, then completely open the wound with some sharp and corrosive powder, and press it on that place where the apopsis is seated; and heal it with another treatment until it is healed.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if it is a large nodule, then you cut the two sides of it, and heal it with a medicine that enters.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	But if the pulsating vein is opposite, or not pulsating, then you cut and stop the bleeding at that place, and leave it open for two or three days until the wound heals, and then return to cutting it again where it is attached to the nodule; and I will leave it to your discretion.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 36.xliv.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	Of the shapes of necessary instruments in section and piercing.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	The shapes are three types, one is large, another is medium, and another is small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The shape of the large introducer is thus:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The shape of the medium introducer is thus:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The shape of the small introducer is thus:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	If it is made of iron, of lead, of sharp edges, and carefully turned at the ends, so that the instrument enters into apopeses easily.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are the shapes of experience, and they are not called anything else, but one of them is called a needle.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	The three types are whether it is large, medium, or small.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The shape of the large experiment, form of it:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The shape of the medium experiment, form of it:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The shape of the small experiment, form of it:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	It is agreed that they are used in apopeses and exits and fistulas and buboes, that some of them are from bones, and others from other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And they are made round, flat, and pointed, as with large needles, which are sewn with silk, and are made of lemon oil, or of iron, or of silver, and the rest are made of oil.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And the experience of black feathers, which agree that through them the fistulas in the cavities are opened, which are reflected with their weight to those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And of the three species, because some of them are long, and others of the other sizes, and others small, according to the amount of the width of the fistula and the strictness of it.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Shape of the great experience of lead:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	Shape of the medium experience of lead:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	Shape of the small experience of lead:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The shapes of the fingers are of different species, because some are simple, in which there is only one bend, and they are of three species: great, few, and small.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And of them are nails with a hook, and they are of three species.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And of those are nails with two bends, and they are of three species.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And of them are nails with three bends, and they are of three species.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	Shape of a large simple nail, shape:
Forma de unci simple migier:	Shape of a medium simple nail, shape:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	Shape of a small simple nail, shape:
Forma de unci orp gran:	Shape of a large hooked nail, shape:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Shape of a medium hooked nail, shape:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Shape of a small hooked nail, shape:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Shape of a large nail with two bends:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	Shape of a medium nail with two bends:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	Shape of a small nail with two bends:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	Shape of a large nail with three bends:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Shape of a medium nail with three bends:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	Shape of a small nail with three bends:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the shapes of the scalpel with which nodules and abscesses are cut and scooped out, and they are of three species, because some are large, medium, and small.
Forma de scapel gran:	Shape of a large scalpel:
Forma del scapel migier:	Shape of a medium scalpel:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Shape of a small scalpel:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The extremities of those with which the section is made are sharp and the other extremities are not-sharp, and they are not stopped in such a way, but so that it is easily done in the excorciation of the nodes, from the fear of incising a vein or a nerve, and by them being healed, a little at a time, with the application of the cautery, which, through its application, heals the patient and brings about tranquility.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the shapes of the almug, and they are of three species: great, medium, and small, so that you may see them.
La forma de magda gran:	The shape of a large almag:
Forma de magda migier:	The shape of a medium almag:
Forma de magda pauc:	The shape of a small almag:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	When it is made of wax and appears similar to fire, and it is made with alcohol.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And it is on the inside of the foot with the pointed stiletto and in those parts that are hidden from view and at the sides and ends, when you wish, so that it may be seen.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The shapes of the spatulas, which are made between the toes and the piercing of abscesses do not perceive the malady, and they are of three species: great, medium, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the shapes of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The shapes of the wind chimes with which the flow of blood is stopped, and they are of three species; great, medium, and small, the shape:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	When it is made of lemon wax, round in shape and not too long, and delicate.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And these species of wind chimes, great, medium and small, that you may stop the flow of blood with speed when necessary, and when you first begin, it is not medicine.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, do not use these to stop the blood from flowing throughout the body, but only in fleshy places, such as those of the legs and thighs, and on the breasts, belly, and arms, and resembling their flesh.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And some are made of those instruments of others small resembling scissors of scissors according to this form; for which the blood is stopped when it is done by phlebotomy, or incision of a vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And some are made round according to this form:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter VII.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	Of the treatment of male breasts, which are assembled from women.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some are inflated breasts of old men, like the skin when it is peeling off, and some are inflated breasts, and those of women, and Roman apostemas, bald, shrunken.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you wish to cut those with a lunar section according to this form, from line B to line G, and then cut off all the ugliness, and then apply the remedy of incurable plague, and then join the two lips together with sutures, and heal it within.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	May it decline to the sides and be softened by its magnitude, so that it is cut into two pieces with the side parts joined together, resembling a lunar shape, in which each one is contained within the other, from line B to line G, and then cut off all ugliness, and then join the two lips together with sutures, and heal it within.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not like the incision of that which is cut off, out of fear of the patient's condition, and of the flow of blood, then, if you wish, apply the remedy of incurable plague submerged in corrosive water, and let it rest within that which is cut off, so that it corrode, and heal it within.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	Of the piercing of abscesses that come from below.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	Those abscesses that come from below are of the species of scrofulae and nodules, which contain a puss.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And of those some contain moisture; and those that contain moisture are cut into a lunar shape according to this figure: from line G to line B. And when all the fluid is drained out of the abscess of the sore, then you may fill it with cotton and let it rest for another day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And let the cotton remain in place and be healed with convenient water.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the abscess of the species of nodules and scrofulae is, then you may cut them into two parts, as it has been said in the section about scrofulae in pieces.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	When the plague extends to the side that is swollen, then apply the cautery according to what has been said in front of it.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter LIX.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	Of the piercing of abscesses that occurs through an artery or a vein.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an artery is broken, and the cord is hardened, which is located above it, then small dots of abscesses form, which cause inflammation and abscesses through the artery or vein: since when an abscess occurs through an artery, it is a long stringy mass in the center of the body; and when you hear the click of an abscess with tiny teeth, you feel a strangeness.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And that which is through a vein is round at its manifestation throughout the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And the section above this abscess is an error, and more so in those that are on the sides, and in the arms, and in the neck, and in the locations of the body; and it is large, therefore it is avoided that its cure with iron is skipped, and that which is at the ends or the top, is avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	Maze of the patient's head, because of the swelling in the orifice of the trachea, cut it on both sides and make a large opening; and then open the windpipe and free the turban before it is uncovered.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And place the needle on that and let it enter into the other one, and then stretch the windpipe by double thread in two places - which causes you to lose your sense of smell when cutting two tracheas that are in the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	Then put the place where it is between two threads with a blade inside so that the blood comes out completely while dissolving the abscess.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then administer a cure when poison is generated inside so that the limbs fall; and then heal it with water and salt to make it well.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if it is an abscess because of venesection, then know that you have your hand on the patient's body, where there is a possibility of an abscess in the vein, and put the needle in the place that you have kept away from your hand, and let it enter; and make a double thread inside so that you extract one from the other side, and tie the abscess with both ends of the thread according to what I said to you about the uvula of two parts with two extremities of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	Maze if you are afraid to extract the thread, then put the needle into the abscess first, and then make four ties with the threads.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Then dry the abscess with a towel in its place so that when it is wet, let him cut the excess of the vein, and leave it water to make it well.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then place on him the pillow that you have dipped in vinegar and oil, and then administer the cure which is made with water and salt to make it well.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Take away from the patient the abscess which happens because of nerve twisting.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Thus an abscess may happen in the windpipe and vein, and may happen in the nerves because of blows or excessive work, and by chance.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	This happens when the patient is in a place where he is not able to move his arms or legs, or in any other part of the body where joints are stretched.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And if it is a hard abscess, and it is the same color as the other side, and when it is hot with fever, you will feel the patient's body in a state of stupor.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And if it is not an abscess that is located in the front of the body, and therefore the vein is cut off from its head, and he becomes paralyzed all over, and does not move forward or backward.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Thus of those who are in joints, if you know that it is swollen because of iron, for strong iron would bring about the opposite effect.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	Maze of those who are in the head or forehead with a blade.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	Maze if it is a small abscess, then know that you have your hand on the patient' side, and cut it out from its root.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is large, then know that you have your hand on the patient' side, and cut it off, and then seal it off; and sew up the wound, and heal it so that it is well.
Capitol .li.	Take away.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	Of section of an abscess which happens in the mouth and stomach.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	Because when the abscess is in the mouth and stomach of men with hair on their bellies, and on their other parts of the body which are similar to mushrooms, whose roots are small and thick, and whose heads are round; and also because those who have long beards are similar to those who have a small beard.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I have already seen one, and in his stomach there were two things that were like mushrooms, and there was no difference between those white ones, with very small roots.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And their lips were turned inside out, and moisture ran from them all the time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Thus I cut those open and turned them upside down in the weight of eighteen pounds. and the other one was six inches long.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And the operation of cutting them is that you consider if the patient' body is wet, and the color of their flesh is white, moist, with small roots; then put the needle on both sides, and let it be in your presence while cauterizing the fire, because the dead tissue must be removed with blood; and if you cut off the blood, cauterize it.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if the patient is a little scared and frightened, refrain from cutting with iron; but then take a fresh piece of lead, and stretch it on the white flesh, in the way that has been described; and leave it for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	Then tighten the tightness of the lead thread; then, do not cut the large piece of lead in half, so that it is cut and falls by itself because of its own work.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	Maze if the piece of lead is large because of its roots, then there is no reason to be afraid or scared, and more so in that which is in the stomach.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	Maybe you can cut off most of it, and then cauterize it so that it does not come back to life.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	Then heal that place so that the wound heals.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And know that you should not cut off a piece of lead which is of a dark color, has little feeling, and looks cold; for such a thing is cancerous.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And I came to remember the croc.
Capitol .lii.	Take away.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	Of cure of an umbilical cord.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	The umbilical cord is caused by various reasons: or because of tears in the navel skin, and because of its thread or intestine, according to whether it is on one side or another; or because of blood flowing from a vein or artery, according to whether it comes from the front or back; or because of constriction of breath within it.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	Maze if it is because of tears in the navel skin and because of the thread, then the color of the abscess will be like the color of the body; and it is painful, and it seems to come from different places.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it is because of the exit of the thread, then know that the place where it is is different from what we have described, and when you press it with your fingers, it goes back; and very strong wind blows over it, and great work is done.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	Maze if because of moisture, then it hurts when you touch it with your hand; and it is neither constricted nor extended.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it is blood, then know that the appearance of these signs indicates that the abscess is turning black.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	Maze if it is because of meat, then the abscess is hard, thick, and durable, and it remains for a certain amount.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	Maze if because of constriction of breath, then the touch of it hurts.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation in it is that you consider if the prominence of the navel cord is because of blood or vein or breath; then know that the cure of it is forbidden, because in it there is fear and fear as I have taught you in the chapter in which I said about abscesses through the arceria and vena.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the prominence of the navel cord is because of the intestine or skin, then know that you command the patient to hold his ale with him, and keep it extended; and then turn it around in the path of all the navel, and then put a blade on both sides above the ale two times, and then cut off most of the abscess in the same path, and then stretch it out with a strong thread, and then tie it up tightly.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And so remove the baby from the apostema that extends over the ligament and insert this stick in there, and if you have not already done so, hold it in place with a strap. If you let go, take care to not dislodge it through the ligament; instead, push the baby out towards the inside of the belly.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have already removed the membrane, then take that pointed stick; and cut away its excesses.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	But if it is contrary to your fire or vein, then go around that point, and return to your operation; and take two needles and attach them strongly to the wires and insert the two needles into the circle that you have made around the apostema in a way that they pierce through it; and then tighten the apostema on the four points where the needles are attached.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you want to, remove the needles and leave the hole open so that the extended flesh can fall away on its own; or cut it off where it is thin and then apply a remedy, and then take care of that part of the body that has been covered in ointment until it heals.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the prominence of the navel is made of flesh or because of moisture, then cover what you have cut off with this medicine as well; and remove any excess moisture that you have put on it, and then take care of that part of the body that has been covered in ointment until it heals.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter III.
De curacio de cranc.	On the treatment of wounds.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have said, in the division, of the kinds of wounds and in what way to treat them with medicine, and that it is useful in treating them with iron so that they are not ulcerated; and we have said that a wound is generated in the greatest care for its treatment.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And they said that some small wounds are in places where it is possible to eradicate them completely, such as the nipples or the hips, and especially when they are just starting out; and above all when they are very small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	But if it is old and big, do not cover it up, because the eye cannot heal such a wound on its own nor have I ever seen one heal like that, nor has it come into contact with water.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation in it is that you go first and leave the patient and cleanse some wounds of black cholera, and then heal them if there is evident pus.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And then prepare the patient with the preparation that is suited for the operation, and then anoint with the trauc (a mixture of oils) those parts that cover it; and then dig deep from all sides with the knife so that there is no remaining cause of its wounds.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And let the wound run its course, and do not wash it away, and squeeze out the pus, and rinse it thoroughly with your hand or with the instrument that you have at hand.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if it causes you pain when you wash it, then cauterize that part so that the flow of blood stops, and then heal it with another treatment until it heals.
Capitol .liv.	Chapter IV.
De curacio de ydropici.	On the treatment of ulcers.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already mentioned, in the division, of the kinds of water ulcerations, and their characteristics, in the treatment of them with medicine.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	That which is treated with iron alone is not the kind of algies that approaches towards tympany or hyposarcary, because water is deadly.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have already treated this kind of ulceration with medicine and do not agree with your treatment, then be careful, because if the patient is cured or has another kind of ulceration (as one in the throat or abdomen that resembles this), then do not treat it with iron, for fear is on this water.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	But if you find the patient to be of great virtue, and only has an ulceration, not child or old age, then the operation for it is that you raise the patient between your two hands, and the minister puts pressure on the abdomen with his hand, pushing water out from the top of the foot, and then take a narrow spike according to this form:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	It should be of two sharp ends long, of the same sharp end as the spike; but above all it should be short, so that in the operation on it you do not pass into the abdomen, and so that you can feel it with your fingers.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And consider if the generation of ulcers is from the abdomen, because it is said that you move away from the navel by three fingers in the space between the legs, on the right side over the penis.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	But if the generation of ulcers is from the genitals, then your section should be to the left of the navel by three fingers.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the generation of it is from the blood, then your section should be on the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And do not cover that your section is over the rib over which you want to operate on the patient so that the excesses do not run to that place.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And then pierce the instrument thoroughly, and insert it into that section, and raise your hand with the spike between your hand and the syringe, and squeeze it out; and if the amount is of a drop or less.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And then pierce the syringe so that the spike comes out at the desired location, and it is a place of water.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then take it out and insert an instrument like this:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	It is made of thin silver, or lead, or a kind of wood; and in its end are three holes, two on one side and one on the other; and it is made like a feather, as follows:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	It is in the end of it that there is a ring, because when the instrument comes into contact with water, then that much of it comes out on one side, for if you let go of that much and do not cover it up at the right time, greatly harm the patient by the resolution of his own spirit, or you will come to five times closer to death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	But evacuate that second amount of its virtue, and according to what you find the patient's spirit is like, consider the disposition of his life from its virtue, and the goodness of it.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And then remove the instrument, and retain that water which causes it, because it is said that as much of it is retained by the codena which retains the mixture that is on the syringe; and according to what we have said, consider how you should pierce that second amount.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And then repeat the instrument on another day if the patient is able to retain water, and evacuate a small amount of it, and make it run a little at a time because there is fear in it, and do not make an error so that it does not come into contact with water except a little.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	But if you fear for the patient, and let go of a great amount of water, then heal it with burial in sand, and stir up the bath, and wait a long time; and heal it with desiccating medicines so that it heals.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And cauterize over the stomach, and the genitals are taken out of water according to what we have said that precedes it.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter V.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	On the treatment of children who are born with ulcers on their genitals, which do not perforate.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Some children are born with ulcers in their genitals (or the head of the mix) that do not pierce; or it is straight (or it is not in its place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Then, when you have removed all trace of his urine as much as possible so that it is only left in the form of a small drop:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	Then tie a small piece of lead and bind it; and do so for three days or 240 hours.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when he needs to urinate, let him go as much as possible; then bring back that which remains.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not stop the lead, the urine that goes over this place will not stay on it.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	And if the one from which you have taken it is thin, bind it with a piece of lead as we said before, for many days until it increases in size.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	And if the one in which you have taken it is not in its place, and this causes it: because of what it does, that which was taken is at the top of the penis by so much as it rises above it; and is not due to generation, for then the semen cannot reach the mother according to its right way, and is a kind of disease.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	And the way to operate is that the patient be placed on his back, and the head of the penis be extended with your left hand to facilitate its extraction; and cut off the tip of the penis at the place of the foreskin with a sharp blade, or if you do not want to remove any part of it, so that the head of the penis resembles the head of the penis and the taken one falls into its own place according to what has been said.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And remember that in your operation of the flow of blood, because it is possible that this happens: and stop it with blood, and cure the plague until it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter LVI.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	About the growth that occurs on the foreskin of the penis, and black color and adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	This growth appears on the penis, and it is a kind of flesh-colored mass.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And there are two types: one is malignant and the other is not.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	Not-malignant, then suspend it with a small piece of thread and cut it off so that it does not grow again; and then bind it with egg and olive oil ointment; and then wash it with the ointment every day until it is healed.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if this growth is malignant, of a dark color: then, when you have operated on it with a sharp blade and removed its roots, treat the wound with a pointed cautery.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	If this growth is in the foreskin of the penis, and one part of it is inside the foreskin and the other part outside: then, when you have a part that is inside the foreskin at the beginning, treat it before it is consolidated; and then you treat the part outside, because when you treat that one with the foreskin, it is not certain that it will not be torn.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And this has also happened in the genitals and in the foreskin: then, when you have completely conquered that which has already been darkened and is beginning to corrode or has been corrupted; and then wrap it with thread, with flour from a loaf of bread, and with three kinds of sand.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	Then wrap it in this way, so that it is cured by the other treatment until it is healed.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	If there is a flow of blood: then administer lunar cautery according to this form:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	because the cauterization that helps the patient's condition is between two situations, as it helps with a flow of blood and with a corruption that is corrupted.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the penis is corrupted and completely destroyed in the moment: then, when you introduce a piece of lead into the meatus of the penis through which urine passes through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adhesion does not occur except in that which has the foreskin, and on it circumcision is not required; and when adhesion occurs by plague or pustule) then cut off with a blunt instrument so that it is dissolved and the head of the penis is completely freed.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to cut off those neatly: then, when you cut off something from the head of the penis and the foreskin, and then, because the foreskin is thin, it is easily pierced by its subtlety in a subtle way.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	Then separate the foreskin from the head of the penis with a small blade, which has been made sharp by grinding it on stone; and then wash it thoroughly in water so that it does not adhere again.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	Then let it be cleaned with caraway powder until it is consolidated.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter LVII.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	About the purification of children and the treatment of urine that occurs in those who have circumcision.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	However, circumcision is not a solution for continence in this way as it is for other plagues: but since it is part of our operation and our will, and because its advantage belongs to those who have it, we will order that those who do not have it are circumcised, making it easier for them to achieve salvation.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	So I say that the young people do not say circumcision in some of the free nations, because they do not use it according to their laws, and is only because we have acquired it by experience: so I have seen most craftsmen and barbers make circumcision and purification from urine; and they use a small blade for cutting and an egg for purification.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And I have already seen all of these ways; and I do not find any better purification with shears, with a small blade, which is used in purification with an egg, because it removes the skin from above, since the skin of the foreskin has two tunics, and the head of the penis remains between them, and is very strong: therefore, it forces another incision and hurts; and it causes pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And the purification that is made with alkaline substances is not secure in the incision of the extreme end of the male member, because it enters into its trail very easily.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	In the operation with an egg, it forces and corrupts your operation very easily.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the child's foreskin is short by nature, and there are growths that occur in this way, so that it does not require purification; I have seen this myself.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	And the purification that is done with shears and a small blade is good; but experience has shown me that these are not suitable for incisions of varying sizes, because the accuracy of the incision that is made is thus: therefore, when you press your hand in a proportionate way, and then cut it according to a comparison at a time; and make a compression of the skin with a figure containing the head of the penis completely, with which there is no error.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the way of the first operation is that you keep the child in a position higher than usual if it is small, and that you do not let the skin come out except by a small amount, and then release it on the following day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	Then return it with happiness in all this way; and that is your ability to respond to such a request.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	Then return it with a strong hand and not weak; and hide the shears in your hand or leave them outside so that the child does not see them or any other instrument.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	Then place your hand on the head of the penis and blow into it; and draw it out so that the head of the penis comes out, and then purify it with water.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And then he sews the wound with a double knot, and ties two small pieces of leather around it, and cuts the middle part of one of these, and puts it over the wound to keep it closed, and sews between two strips of leather.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then he raises the wound and removes the skin; and leaves it for a few days, because it is better so; and puts powder on it and over the powder lays a cloth in which cow's milk has been boiled and reduced to a syrup; and leaves it there for another day; and treats it with cura within that time until it is healed.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The form of the scissors for dissection, this is the form:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	They should be sharp on one end and dull on the other, so that the blade of the knife does not bend, and its length should be the same as the length of two fingers put together.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	There is an error in dissection because, if you cut through all the internal threads, or part of it, then the incision should be made from within.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	So that you can reach out to your own finger in front of the location of the incision and make a second incision at the same length.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot reach it with your own hand, then extend it with a hook and cut it with a knife.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	But if it has been three days, and then you leave the wound open, so that the poultice remains in place, and cleanses it with ease, and makes the second incision, which has been prepared for you.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And take care of the head of the axe, because it will not be used again.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And so treat that wound with water that solidifies the poultice which we have described in the treatise on poultices.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if the incision is made beyond measure and obeys the guidelines above, then it will not be known.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	But treat that wound with water which we have said is to be healed.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter LIII.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	Of the Treatment of Urine Retentive in the Bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstructions due to stones or calcification, or by an increase in the amount of urine or food, which are similar to those we have said about the methods of treatment in the division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not dissolved and the bladder is distended by the increase in urine, which has already reached the neck of the bladder, then place the patient on their side.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	And place the feet of the patient on his two sides and extend his abdomen by stretching his belly as much as is possible.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Then the neck of the bladder is constricted and excretion is achieved through the back passages, so that urine is passed completely.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if the urine is not dissolved with the water we have mentioned as vigorous, then place the instrument called a syringe, whose form is: It should be made of silver and be thin, like a long needle in similarity to a palm tree and half a tree; the cannula should be thin at its tip.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the manner of passing urine through it is that you take the double knot and tie it to the end of the cannula with a good knot; and introduce the ends of the string into the cannula, and cut them off with scissors if there is any excess string; then insert the cannula into the urethra with force and introduce the liquid urine.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And let the patient lie on his back, and immerse the bladder in water, and rub it with oil and herbs.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	And then introduce the cannula with ease until it reaches the tip of the penis; and double the end of the cannula towards the glans; and push the cannula into the bladder, and this should reach the patient's bladder, and no further action should be taken except to let it flow naturally, unless there is a blockage due to a stone.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And then extend the string little by little, because urine seeps through the cloth little by little.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	And then remove it and treat with urine, and use a cannula; do not stop to let the water out and use a syringe until the bladder is emptied and the patient relieved of his discomfort.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter LIX.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	Of the Quality of Bladder Irritation with a Clasp and similar instruments to those that agree with water.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When an ulcer or pustule occurs in the bladder, or there is a concussion in that part, and you wish to extract water and medicines from it, then use an instrument called a clasp, which is of this form:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	but in its end it should be silent, so it is closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that there are three holes: two of the same size, and the third is smaller.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	In the beginning it is closed, so that water is retained in it and expelled when necessary; and it is thrown out with the water, and when it is thrown out, it is long, according to the quantity of what is inside, so that it can be used for the purposes of the sea.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	Then when you wish to introduce moisture into the bladder, insert the end of the clasp into the moisture, and push the water that is pressed forward out through the holes, because the moisture is pushed into the clasp's cavity.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And then insert the end of the clasp into the penis according to what we have described in the cannula; and push moisture with it, because that moisture will reach the bladder, and the patient will feel it.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The form of the thin blade that the bladder is to be massaged with, which is this form:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	It should be made of silver or lead, the tip of which should be sharp and similar to a small feather, and the cannula should be thin inside.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	And then move the bladder with force, and pause in it the moisture that you wish to crystallize in the bladder, and tie it between two strings of double knot, and heat that moisture on fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And then insert the end of the blade into the penis.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And then stretch your hand over the bladder with moisture, and this should reach the bladder, and no further action is taken except to let it flow naturally.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	But if you do not have a bladder, then take a piece of parchment and make it into a circle; and pierce that circle throughout its entire circumference; and then insert the double-knotted string through those holes, turning it as you go, and adding to it as you go, because you pause in that water which you wish to collect from moisture, and rub and add water.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And then you tie that in the instrument, and do as we have said about the bladder, and express it into your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Chapter LXVI.
De extraccio de peyra.	Of Urine Passage.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already said about the varieties of urine and the treatment of it with medicines, and the difference between urine produced in the lungs and urine produced in the bladder, and the signs of either.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	We have described the urine in which there is a catarrh, and its treatment with water.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	Urine produced in the bladder itself is that which is retained in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And I am narrating that same am explicit manifestation and abbreviation.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore say that urine generated in the bladder most often comes from infants; and from the men of the man is that the urine that is discharged from the bladder is similar to water in its subtlety, and appears in the sand; and the patient rubs his staff, and leaves a trace, and is dressed; and if it does not come out in front.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	Is the cure for children of that disease which they have acquired at twelve years old, and is difficult to cure in the elderly.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	Might be cured by water, since it is among those.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And of that which has more pain and the cure is less effective; And if it is little, it is contrary to that.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore, let us come to the cure of that, with which we will baptize the patient with holy water, from which he will remove all the wound, since that wound is a cause of disease due to its investigation.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And let the patient be put on his feet and moved and massaged in order that the pain goes down into the pelvis of the bladder, or that it jumps from place to place, or some spots.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And let that cut between your hands be prepared, and the hands of him are left with cushions, so that the entire bladder hangs down between the cushions.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And then turn it over and all of it upside down.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	Therefore, if you feel the pain in the space, then quickly lay him down on his side.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if he doesn't stop completely from leaving him alone, then turn him over and apply oil to his back with the right hand; if the patient is a child, or the young are complete, apply it to their chest, and insert it into his buttocks.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And turn over the pain that is in the space that is behind him.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And turn that small one little by little into the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	And then press on it with your finger, and expel that one from the space where you have placed it.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And order the minister to press on the bladder with his right hand; and order another minister, with his left hand, to stretch the genitals towards the armpits, and at the place where the cut is made.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Then insert your finger into the small opening which is there; this is its form:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	and cut through it with the knife that is between the buttocks and the genitals, not in the middle, moving from side to side of the left thigh; and make the incision over that pain and the right hand is on the buttocks, and make a transverse incision, so that the incision outside is wide and narrow inside according to the quantity that comes out of the pain to him is possible, and not more, since it is very strong, comprem the right hand which is in the buttocks; and then cut off its genitals.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And you should know that there is no pain to which it does not respond; and therefore the difficulty of its treatment by water is due to the fact that the relief from it is difficult.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And of that water is like a nut, and is round, and is easier to relieve by it.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	Therefore if it is that which has no angle or margin, put it in the crack between.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not like that, then turn it over and put a piece of cloth on it, or squeeze it gently, the end of which should be on the pain, and do not remove it from him; or insert something sharp at its end.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	Or if you cannot stand on it, then put a small pole under it, and if you see blood flowing from it, cut through it with a three-pronged pitchfork.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	Or if the pain is more than one, at the beginning put your hand in the mouth of the bladder, and then cut through it; and then cut through a small piece nearby; and then if there are more than two points, cut through them.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if there is great pain, then ignore that you cut it with a large incision, since this happens to the elderly because they do not have solid organs: or that it is due to continuous urine; therefore the place does not become solid.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	Or minister expel from him that which is outside; or cut it with scissors within, so as to extract the piece.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Therefore when you have completed your work, then fill the wound with plant juice and blood of dragon, and strengthen it.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And place a cloth over him wet in oil and vinegar, or in rosin and water rubbed together, so that it may congeal;
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	And then put the patient down on his side, and do not separate the members within three days.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when that patient has separated, pour water and oil into the wound, and then cure it with a solution of salt and a solution of mercury within; for it will heal.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	Or if in the wound there is congealed blood, dry and corrosive, and of that one seems as if the pain is frozen in the bladder, and therefore the urine is prevented from leaving the body; then insert your finger into the wound and extract the piece, since if it remains, it causes the bladder to corrode and decay.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then wash the wound with oil, water, and salt; and in opposition to all kinds of food, with water that is used for drinking, and thus cure it within; for it will heal.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And at the times of all the cures that you have mentioned, put on both sides the cushions and place the medicines in the space.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the pain is small and is in the testicles, and is fixed there, and urine is prevented from flowing; then cure it with water, which I have mentioned before you come to the cut; for it will be that you take a sharp knife, whose shape is as follows:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	of triangular point, thin, fixed at its base.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	Then hold it firmly, and with the hand place the staff beneath him, so that it does not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And then insert the knife into the staff, piercing at ease within; for the piercer is able to pierce that pain.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And turn the piercer over your hand in that small pain, and you will pierce the piercing of it from the other side; for the urine is soon discharged.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	Then press your hand on it with the edge that is opposite to the pain of the staff, since that is sharpened, and is pierced by it; for the pain will be healed soon.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	Or if this cure is not appropriate for you by any cause which prevents it from that pain, then hold one staff beneath him, and another above him;
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	Then cut through the pain in the staff between two lines.
E aprop extratz aquela.	Then remove it.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	And then separate the members and wash the piece with water.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	It is not necessary to hold the staff under him so that it does not return to the bladder, but so that it does not leave; and when it is separated, the other one above, since when it is separated, the code returns to its place and hurts the wound.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	It is necessary for you to raise the code above when you hold the staff; or it returns to its place, and hurts the wound, thus: "If it returns to its place, it will hurt the wound."
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter .lxi.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	On the extraction of stones from the urinary bladder.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	stones in the female bladder are rarely generated.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	If there is a stone in either of them, then the cure is difficult and is prohibited by many manual techniques.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of them is because the female bladder becomes stiff.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second is that you do not find a woman who can reveal if she has had sex when she is pregnant, or is a married woman.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	And the third is that you do not have a woman who knows this art well, mainly for the operation of the hand.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth is that the place of section for stones in the female bladder is far from the place where the stone is, so as not to cause a painful section, and at that place there is danger.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	But if necessity forces you to use water, then it is necessary that you take a pregnant woman who knows well, and she is rarely found.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	But if you are deprived of that, then look for one who is quick and subtle, or present an old woman who knows well the art of removing stones from the female bladder, or a woman who is skilled in this art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Therefore, let her be presented, and command her to do all that you will send her, from the investigation of the stone to the start; which is why she watches if the woman is stiff, then she hides the stone in her buttocks and wants the stone.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Therefore, if she is found, let her be taken from her, and then command her to pierce herself.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	But if she is not stiff, then command the old woman to insert her finger into the crotch of the patient and pierce it over the stone, since she puts her left hand on the bladder, and pierce the stone with a good grip.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Therefore, if she is found, then it is necessary that she gradually remove her finger from the orifice of the bladder to the end of its length, within which it reaches the root of the cushion.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	Then pierce it on the tip of the finger with its length that goes from any part of the crotch to her stopped and centers the stone in that place, and the word of it is not taken out of the stone by piercing her with a sharp object from behind.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the section should be little at first; and then insert the finger into that section, and if you feel the stone, then adjust the section according to its quantity, which I know that the stone will come out of it.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And you should know that the nature of stones is varied: some are small and large, and sharp and blunt, and some have edges.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Therefore, you should know how many kinds there are of water that you will use for each kind.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you want to stop bleeding, adjust it in the virulent place and pierce her for an hour until it stops bleeding, and then return to your operation before the stone is lost.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	Prepare those instruments that are said in the extraction of stones from men, so that you are helped by them in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you want to stop bleeding, and you know that the exit of blood is from the piercings that are made, then you pause dust on the place and stir it with powder and pressure downward, and do not repeat water; and leave the stone and do not extract it, because the female bladder will die.
E aprop cura la plagua.	Then heal the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	Therefore, when the sharpness of the pain is reduced, the place will heal, then return to your operation before the stone is lost.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter lxii.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	On section over hernia.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	Hernia is only an accumulation of moisture in the white membrane which leaves the testicles contained in the scrotum, and it is called cipha.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And some testicles are in the proper scrotum, which nature has provided at the beginning of the testicle, so that it is separate from another testicle; and it is the membrane of the testicle between the white membrane that we have mentioned, and it is not water but wax.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is by the disease that happens to the testicles, so that this substance is discharged there, and sometimes it happens due to injury made on the testicles.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	This moisture is not colored, because its color is changing to yellow or bloody, or red, or black, or feisty, or white, and it is water that is more.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which this accumulation of water can be found: because if it is in the white membrane that we have mentioned, then the swelling is round and slightly long, like a testicle's figure, and it appears the testicle, because the moisture contains all its parts.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	If the moisture is in the proper scrotum, then the swelling is round at the beginning of the testicle, and thus one estimates that it is another testicle.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	If the moisture is between the membrane of the testicles and the white membrane, then let him be silent.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And if you want to know the color of the moisture in the swelling, then look at the shape of its edge that is just inside the crotch; and according to the water that is discharged in the track of it, judge that it is on the inside.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	Therefore, when we come to the cure of it by drinking, then let us order the patient to drink if water is possible for him, and wash his clothes with wine.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	Then let it be placed on its two feet on a slight edge, and put away some sheets.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	Then place yourself on the left side of him, and order the servant to follow the right side of him, which extends his staff between two rods at the crotch of the patient, and at the start of the miracle of the womb.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	Then take a sharp knife and cut the membrane of the testicles from one side to another, within the fifth inch.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	Then make the section according to a rule of distance from the line that you should follow with the hair of the testicles, so that it reaches the white membrane.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	Then cut it, and observe, and keep it so that you do not pierce it; and your cutting of it on the side is more subtle than suspended on the testicle, and carefully examine the cutting according to the amount that is possible for you.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	Then pierce the white membrane completely with a wide piercing, and drain all the water out.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	Then separate the two sides of the section by a nail, and extend the white membrane to the end; and do not touch the membrane of the testicles together, and pierce the white membrane in that way that is possible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	Then pierce it with its entirety or in pieces, and especially the white membrane, because if you do not examine carefully the piercing of it, it is not guaranteed that the water will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	But if the testicles are removed from him by his side in the hour of your operation, then when you have finished cutting the white membrane, return to them, and then adjust the two sides of the membrane together with sutures, and then heal those wounds as well as the others, so that they are healed.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if the hernia is corrupted by another disease, then cover that part of the body with a cloth and remove it, and then treat it as described above.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	If the water is divided into two parts, then you know that there are two hernias; therefore, cut the part according to what you have done on the other side; and if it seems to you that it is an operation, do so.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	Then clean the wound and put it in water or oil; then immediately put another cloth immersed in water or oil over the area, and spread out a double sheet and powder, and lay that open with this form:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	and spread two sheets and be humiliated with wool according to this appearance; and be made the extremities pressed from a cover or wet wool, and be added to the structure in the breeches of the braces, and one of the extremities takes place between the two, and the other takes place at the split of the pantalon, and two extremities on two cousines left and two extremities on two angles, and all the structure is adjusted in the braces of the braces.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And some hernia is treated surgically instead of cutting it off; and it is that you take a sharp knife and cut the cord between the genitals, and burn it according to what we have described inside that it is discovered the white cipha containing water, and then you take a surgery according to this form:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	and it is assembled in the Greek letter.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	Then pierce that cipha, and it burns inside that all moisture is lost.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	Then remove the cipha with nails, and scrape it with a sharp knife, and burn it; then cut it according to what you can do so that you eliminate all of it; and guard yourself from the fire that the heat does not touch you.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And know that this operation is safer and further away from bleeding than cutting it; and better than an operation with cutting.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	If you have any discomfort during the operation or cutting, or bleeding, then cover that part with a cloth according to what is said above.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	If the patient is a little bit ill and does not hope for the second operation because of its horror, then administer piercing according to what I have described above; and it is when it is confirmed that that hernia is water-based.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Then cover that part of the patient on a high table, then pierce the swelling at the lowest part of the body with a spatula, and pierce according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And be wide opening where all water comes out.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	Then place your hand over the area and lift it up, and leave it in that position so that the water does not flow.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	Then treat that part where the plague is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	If discomfort is caused by the escape of water in that hour when you pierce it: and it does not happen unless the white cipha in the orifice of the plague causes discomfort and prevents the flow of water, then know that you put into the plague a penic or an instrument from which the water comes out, the shape of which is preceded; or adjust in the pressure of the plague a small.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And know that water returns, and is collected in a pot or vessel after three months or more; when it is added, then pierce according to this method, for the illness will last its days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter LXXXIII
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	On Surgery on Chasmous Hernia and Treatment of It.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	Know that in the surgery on this hernia is a great danger of death in most cases; but I have seen its removal and survival thanks to it.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And I remember the operation on that one and the spices of the swellings.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	So then I say that the swelling rises in the legs of those who are thin and it is caused by excess acute fluid: or by impact.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And it is the color of the swelling according to the color of the body, and does not hurt in pain, and the swelling is heavy.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And the swelling is hard to press, and its color is dark, and it does not feel to the touch.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And some swellings are caused by the inflammation of the nerves, and by the swelling of the veins; so that their presence is felt, or by the swelling of the veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	If water is caused by the inflammation of the nerves, it is recognized by the disappearance of the swelling when you compress it with your fingers, and it does not hurt when touched.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	If water is caused by the swelling of veins, it is not recognized by any compression with your fingers.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that for this species surgery and on other bodies; and it is that you cut the cord between the genitals, and extract the humors from each part of the body, and tie them together, and cut them apart, and then treat them according to what has been described.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	So if the hummus is already hardened on those bodies, then extract the hummus and cut it apart.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is adhesion inside the cipha or between it and the veins, then cover that part with a cloth according to what has been described; and cut it apart with a round knife.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	If there is birth of flesh in the place where the adhesion is located, which is behind, then cover that part with a cloth according to what has been said; and extract the hummus as described above.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then, when your operation is complete, fill the wound with wool soaked in rose oil and water; then treat that part with another treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter LXIV
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	On the Treatment of Chasmous Hernia.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	There is an swelling wrapped in a covering that resembles the softening of the testicles, and it is difficult to move or walk on the patient's leg.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the treatment of this illness is by fear for water from which its removal is preceded remembrance.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, I will tell you about surgery on that one as well:
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	Then cover that part with a raised platform; and then place the suspenders of the testicles on each side of the body, and tie them to the genitals with threads tied around the waist, and tie them tightly so that they do not move.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	Then cut across the bottom of the veins with a transverse section between the bayssels where they are visible.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And then scrape from each part as much as you have described in the removal of the nerves that are found in the veins.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And then keep one needle there where it is double and pierce that part at the first place where it occurs; and pierce another one further back in the same leg.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	Then cut them in half with a transverse section according to the length of the body, and extract what is added from the foul and corrupting moisture.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	Then treat the plague with another treatment of the other plagues that you want to heal; so that they do not fall on the veins that connect the testicles, because it is dangerous for water to enter them.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	And if all the vessels are stopped up, then know that either the testicles have been cut away or that the testicles for this reason lack nourishment through the vessel's incision, and are withered, or that they have been cut off in order not to be rejuvenated by them.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter .lxxxv.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	On the Treatment of Intestinal Hernias.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The arrival of this hernia is due to an incision which extends across the abdomen on either side of the navel, so that some of the intestines are separated from the rest by that incision, and some of them come out through it.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this incision is either from the navel itself or from an enlargement of it, and such things happen for different reasons: either by pounding, or by loud noise, or by sudden movement, or because of some heavy cause, or because of a similar event.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	And the sign of this is that it happens little by little over a long period of time and not suddenly, and it is pus inside the navel, pressing against the intestines from within, so that the navel compresses the intestine.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the sign of it is when it happens by incision in the navel, for at the beginning great violent pain occurs suddenly; and there are pus-like emissions close to the navel, and this is due to the intestine being pressed from within, and the skin splitting in places next to the navel.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And some of them are left without a covering membrane, and this is called an intestinal hernia called zibural.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And some of them become swollen and some of them run in the intestine, and here it is re-absorbed, and this causes great pain to the patient, and more often than not when it is pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the treatment of these diseases, it is necessary to take care not to damage anything, so that the incision should be made with care at that place.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And the way to operate on it is that you command the patient to return the intestine to its cavity if he obeys your instructions for returning it, and then place it over his chest between your hands, and raise his legs.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And then cut the cord that connects the testes to their upper parts, and incise the whole length of it, and then place it between two blades of the incision as you would like to open the incision for them.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if there is a lack of amount that can be obtained from it, then cut off part of it.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And then remove that navel, which is covered by the cord of the testes, until it is completely uncovered, and cut off the navel's upper part where it is hard and white.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	And then place the patient so that his testes are above his navel, and this is between the white navel and the second navel, and below the attachment that is in the back of the navel.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And then cut off the cord of the testes at their upper parts, and extend the white navel to its left side, and raise the navel to the part of the incision; and order the minister to extend the navel above it, and you dissolve the attachment that is behind with a complete solution.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And ask by the patient's testes whether there is any cause for the navel to be wrapped in the hard white navel.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	And if you find no cause, then place that navel on the abdomen.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And then take a needle that is firmly fixed to four threads, and pierce the navel' back, which is below the cord of the testes, and this is an incision; and then make incisions at both ends of the thread within the navel, until they reach a certain shape like a cross; and bind those two ends together tightly.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And then wrap the ends of the threads and bind them together tightly with a firm knot, so that from here no pus or cause comes for any vessel that might transmit this to the navel, so that an abscess does not form.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And there is another thread that follows the first thread, long enough to tie it three times; and then cut off these two threads from the navel where the cord of the testes is left in the amount of its size, and make a round incision all around it, and bind the navel' edges together.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And then make an incision in the cord of the testes by incising its lower parts, and this is the incision that causes pain and healing as we have described above.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And then administer a soaking of oil and place it in the incision, and then bind the thread that we have described (and sometimes the hard navel is cauterized with an incision as it is the cause of a flow of pain, because sometimes it happens) and leave the thread inside so that it falls.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	And if the oil does not work, then water is boiled and poured on, and placed on it so that it falls as we have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And this cure for the wound with another treatment for wounds within the time that is needed to heal.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter .lxxxvi.
De hernia ventosa.	On Ventilated Hernias.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia, it is not seen that anything has been done to treat it in order to cause pain.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first ones said that it happens in such a way as we have described in the hernia that is on the navel with ease of movement; and then dry up its location by applying an incision to it from all sides, so that the vessels come out.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And this cure for the wound as we have said within the time that is needed to heal.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter .lxxii.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	On Discomfort in the Thighs:
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	And sometimes the hernia ruptures in the thighs as we have said, and emits its location.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And they do not give any cause for the navel to the genitals; and if they do, then this is little; and in a short time return, "for so often as it does."
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	And if the time is prolonged with it, then a small crack forms in the navel within the navel's upper part; and this happens by the extension of the navel as we have said, and becomes soft at its location and emits pus.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And this cure for it is like cauterization as the previous description of it precedes.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And sometimes it is cured with fire in this way: the patient sits on their buttocks between your legs, and then dry up the location of the rupture by incising for three times.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And make it tighten the white scarf that is under the knot so that it is not discovered.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	Then take the rope and place it over the upper part of the scarf, and put it around the stomach.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	Then cut the two upper points on the end of the scarf, and sew one to the other.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	Then remove the end of the rope and do not cut it from the scarf completely, nor spread the intestines, nor for any other reason do I want you to know in the treatment of an intestinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And for the treatment of boils, and when you cut the scars, wash it well and restore the boil before it hardens; because the scarf contracts and the prominence of rupture is not adjusted.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	The cauterization is better in this place, because it is closer to healing.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter .lxxxviii.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	On the Softening of the Testicles.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	In some men, the testicles are softened by water because the flesh between them is softened, and attention must be paid to this.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Then, for the treatment of him who is treated, it is necessary that he lie down according to his back and chest, and sew all the testicles together that are softened on the natural string; and when he has made two slits, one above and one below, cut through both.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you want, cut off the excess of the softened testicle with three or four cuts and a firm stitch.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	Then cut between the stitches; then treat other boils for healing, and let the scars fall off.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter .lxxxxi.
De castracio.	On Castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	Know that in our law castration is forbidden, except for the sake of an argument in this book; and it is not necessary to recall that argument unless I remind myself of it, which concerns the science of the doctor when he is asked about the cure of him who has been castrated; and the other way is that we may have need of castration of other animals for the benefit of our own, in case of rams, and goats, and pigs, and animals like them.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	Then I say that castration is done in two ways: either by cutting from behind or by cutting with a section.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	Except that which is done by cutting from behind; the way of the operation is that you make a cut in the animal's tail within, so that its genitals are softened and weakened and they hang down.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	Then take them by your hand within so that they are relaxed and do not appear to be loose with the touch.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	Except for castration by cut and section, if you have the animal, and press the testicles of it with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	Then take the suspenders, and cut on each side with a section so that two cuts are made.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	Then cut those again as you would cut an Excort.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	Do not cut over the scarf for any reason except that which is over the veins.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	This way of castration is better, because it cuts from behind, so that the animal does not desire to copulate.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	Then heal the boil before it hardens.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter  .lxxx.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	On the Treatment of Hermaphroditism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphroditism in men is due to two ways: one is because the space between the testicles is closed, which forms a penis-like figure because of confusion of the male sex organs; and another is that the female organs appear because of confusion of the male sex organs.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	Some men have a flow of urine from the testicles.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	Except in some women, who have a male penis: it is like the confusion of the male organs; and because the scrotum of the woman is like that of the man and two testicles.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	The treatment is of three kinds: of two men's kinds, and of one woman's kind.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	It is because you cut those tissues together within so that it escapes the smell of the animal, and then treat them with treatment for other boils.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	In the second kind of men from whom urine flows from the testicles, there is neither treatment nor operation.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter .xxi.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	On the Lancing and Cutting of Flesh for Female Causes.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	A strong lancing is adjusted on natural causes within which is distended and is done with care; and in some women, it is increased to such an extent that it affects the sexual intercourse.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Then take the excess of lancing with your hand or a knife and cut it.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	Do not end in incision, especially on the head of the razor, so that it does not cause bleeding.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	Then heal those with treatment for boils within which is healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	Except for hidden meat which is within the animal, and it has a strong taste that disturbs the stomach; and I cut that with lancing, and heal those within which are healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter   .lxxxii.
De curacio de alratica.	On the Treatment of Ulceration.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Ulceration is that the woman' s hole not be pierced, or it is a small hole.
E es o natural o accidental.	It is either natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental is by bad meat which has preceded, and that is made or by unnecessary meat adjusted or by subtle string or hard.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	It is made or in the head of the mother, or on its sides, or on the upper part of it, or on the lower part of it, and it prohibits cutting and impregnating and procreating; and strongly prohibits menstruation.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	The knowledge of that is done with care if the opposition appears, then it is not known; but if it does not appear, then you ask about that with the ditz or the rope.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	Except if the opposition is by subtle string; and it is between the two points, then you cut and break that.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	It is because you put your hand on both sides of the opening, and you put the ditz or rope between them in advance.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	The woman is under her two points, her legs extended, and you open the two points with force within which the subtle string of that is broken, and if opposition appears, then it is not known.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	Then take a piece of wool and tie it on the area with four knots, and keep it on that location to prevent it from becoming hardened.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	Except if the string is thick and hard, then cut that with a sharp knife or a piece of glass.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	Except if the opposition is by meat, then hang that with a rope, and cut it.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	There are three medicines which stop the flow of blood: namely, bitter salt and acacia, and dragon's blood and ensets, adjusted to the skin of a goat.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	Then administer a broad copper tube so that the boil is not hardened too quickly.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	Hold that for many days and administer a liquid medicine.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	Then it is healed with another treatment of consolidation within which is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	Sometimes, in the mother' s birth, other meats appear; and then cut according to this way.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	If so is it for a hard apoplexy, to the hard apoplexy that is in the main is not made an opposition with any kind of way.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Capitol LIII.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	Of the Cure of Hemorrhoids and of the Tail and of the Red Botor that Occurs in the Conches of Women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Emorrhoids so appreciate of the outlets of little veins within that of those come out slowly continually; and when emorrhoids are old and are made.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And I have already said in the division the spices of those and their signs, and direct them also those that I receive cure and those that I do not receive cure.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore say that emorrhoids and those when they are in the front of the main and do not appear to the feeling, in those is not made cure by any means.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	But those that are in the outlet of the main on which there is a sensation, are those that are cured.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And where you put the woman in a smock to rub and approach them with scissors or a sharp cloth, and cut them with the nails.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And you should sprinkle on them the flow of the juice of one of the powders that are cut with a mordication, so also to acacia and similar to those.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And you should tie their feet for an hour, and place them in fresh water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the flow of the juice persists, then make them boil in a decoction of sumac and of rashes of milgranas and of gualas and similar.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And you should prepare flour from wheat and make them a paste with honey and vinegar, and apply it to the two of them.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the juice is cut off, so it is; and if not, then make them adhere to the two vents, and to the nipples make a cutting.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And you should prepare wool and dip them in juice of coriander or in juice of arnagloza or in juice of guava with five parts of water, and make them adhere to the place; and cure the place with a hot poultice where it is.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	But those that are old and have a sharp appearance, where you cut water that is not of that second which I have said in their joining.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And cure that place where it is sanable.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Capitol LXIV.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	Of the Perforation of Hardening that Occurs in the Main.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Little spices of hardens occur in the main, so also when it is hard and the apoplexy that is like a diamond and ulcers and adhubela and erpetrombres and fistulas of emorrhoyds and rugosities and thyle and other hardens.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already said these malignancies and the spices of those and their signs, and the cures of them in the division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And where I say in this treatise of hardens how it is done to the main when they are hardens that you have made them sanable, and if you want to know how the operation is done by any means.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Then consider if the pain of the hardens in its beginning is acute with percussion and phlegm and fever, and sometimes that hardening and if it appears on it a feeling, then do not make its perforation, but cure it with water that helps over the maturation within that stops the acuteness of the accidents.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And then if you have made the woman lie on a bench that has two benches; and place her on her back with her legs open from her belly, and her cushions are spread out, and pause her hands from her sides, and tie some to a rope conveniently to water.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	And the midwife should follow from behind and administer the instrument with which she will make an opening in the outlet of the main, the form of which will come about in those cases that she will do it properly.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And where you want to administer this instrument, then you should lie on your back with the woman's legs open from her belly, and the water that comes out of the instrument is not more than the front of the main and the whole of the patient's clothes.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	But if the instrument is larger than the front of the main, then consider that you should not make any opening in the front of the main by any means.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And consider that you should not make any turning that runs in the instrument above it, and that the minister holds the instrument and makes a turning within that it is made an opening in the outlet of the main.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when the excitement appears, and it is touched with the hand and is wet, then consider that you should not make a cutting in those with a sharp tool.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the sanable is evacuated, then consider that you should make a cutting in those with a submerged blade in rosin or green oil, and pause the hair in the division of the front of the main.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And you should not make any opening in the main and over a five-pointed lamb's wool that is clean and submerged in water where the mauve colors are dissolved.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And it should be sanable by any means, and by applying a hot poultice within two days that is sanable.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And some are washed with the main and the shower that is made by water and honey, and you should dip them in a water where the hair of the lamb or of the horse's mane is dissolved, and then return to the poultice.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the shower is within the main that has been washed, then consider that you should not make any cure by any means.
Capitol .lxxv.	Capitol LXV.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To Teach Midwives in What Way the Eager Bus Men Are Curable When They Are Said According to Figure That Is Not Natural.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	A necessary cause is that the midwife should know in the beginning of the natural childbearing according to signs of it, and is when you see the woman express herself at the separations and desire to smell the air, and over it is absorbed by water that comes out from it that is about the birth, and hastens its excitement, then know that this birth is a second figure that is natural, and is the excitement of it on its head, and the second to hang or to suspend from its navel.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	And then when you see these signs, then consider that the woman's belly is agitated so that the childbearing does not become heavy gradually when it comes on its head, then turn it over, and it is free from those superfluous things with good purification.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu .i., o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	But that which is the other of this birth is not natural and not fit, because when the excitement is on its back and the body is turned to its head and the hands to its feet, then the mother of it turns her over, or at its feet. Or it is turned on the woman's head and the mother of her, or at her belly, and firm is turned to its hip, and resembling figures are not fit.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	A necessary cause is that the midwife should be wise and subtle in all causes, and that she guards against error and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And I am showing you those figures, and what meaning there is in them by water that comes out of them and stands on it.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	And when the excitement is turned on its head by natural strength and that is violent with the woman, and difficult is made the birth, and sometimes the virtue of it is already weakened, then consider that she should not cut it. But if the women hold her, and make a perfume from fenugrec and green oil.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And bring the measuring stick between his little finger and the thumb, or cut off that one with the knife, for there is moisture in it.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press the woman's belly within so that she may give birth.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	If it does not come out, then cover the woman with a blanket so that she may be warmed by the sun.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And order him to be rubbed and pressed, and let him sneeze with the cold; and place his mouth and nose for an hour, because the child will soon come out.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if the two children are sneezed on at the beginning, then cover yourself with a light cloth.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	If you do not obey the instrument, then place the woman on a stool and lift her feet up, and then strike the stool against the ground; and let the woman be held so that she does not fall down due to the blow.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the last two are not turned inside out and the child dies, then cut those off and take the navel string from the child or tie it tightly around it, because it will soon die.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	Of the fetus' emergence on his feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the child comes out on his feet, then cover him with a blanket, and turn the child over, and take a foot of him, and stretch it little by little.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	But when the child is born between the thighs, then order him to be pressed and let him sneeze with the cold, for he will soon die if God wills it.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it is not born with the water that I have mentioned, then return the child little by little until you reach his second nature, for he will soon die if he does not come out with the second birth.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is forbidden by all the water that I have mentioned, then take the mustard and the dissolved gum, and strike them all together in a mortar with a good strike, and pour the congealed blood of the woman, the highest part of her belly, into it.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	Then form a ring in running water within which you will keep the sick person.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when the wounds of the patient no longer bleed, then give him mint smoke to inhale and make him breathe through the nose.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	When the mint smoke has been inhaled for an hour, then place him on a stool and make him sneeze and open his mouth, and remove anything from it, and press his lower abdomen gently, because the child will soon come out.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Of the fetus' emergence on his feet and in its place.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the child comes out in this form, then you make small movements within his members; and let the woman be seated on her back, and place his feet down, and his hands above them, and press his body.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	Then press his belly little by little, and take out what is between his legs within which the feet are placed, so that it is prepared for the second birth of the child.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the child is not born, then take his feet and move them violently, and press what is between his legs little by little within which the child may be born.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	Then bring his members together and make the child small by small, and order the woman to be pressed so that the child may come out.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Of the fetus' emergence from its mother's belly hanging one of its members.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	It should be born in a reduced state from the mother's womb, but if it cannot be reduced, then raise the woman and let her go down.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	If she cannot go down, then place her on the ground, and strike those who are with her with a violent blow, and administer to them the drugs that I have mentioned and others.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	If the child has been born, then place him on a stool and study his reduction from the mother, and take the second child according to its natural form, and make the woman sneeze and order her to be pressed so that she may be born.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Of the fetus' emergence on the back expanded members and the foot of it is at the second place from its mother.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	Then may the woman take the child's head and gently turn him little by little, and he will come out easily.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when it is and how long it takes to be swallowed up, then place it on the congealed blood that I have mentioned of oil and mucus.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	Then order him to be rubbed little by little, and when he comes out, then form a ring on the right side of the body and make him sneeze with the cold.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	Exit: The preparation of the exit for the child.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When it comes out horribly from the mother according to this method, consider it, and then you will open the second one with your hand within that is evacuated of moisture.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the fetus hangs over the face of the neck, then you will open it up, so that it is not held and it does not die.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	Then you make the child ready within his members before opening the second one, so that it may come out with its first nature if God wills it.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	Exit: The exits of twins or multiple fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Know that twins are different types of vision, and sometimes there are three or four, but they are strange to the world, but in nature they are dead, and not alive.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And if there are two, then they are different types, and sometimes there are three or four, but they are strange to the world; and in nature they are dead, and not alive. And sometimes a second one is born by natural birth, which is good; and sometimes two are born at once from one womb, and sometimes it is strange; and if there are two or more, then they are different.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if it is difficult for them to be born in a natural way and come to water that I have mentioned of the figures not natural, then you take care of them as I have mentioned.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	If the mother is subtle and the foot of her is at the right place in a subtle way, and with delay, then she will be prepared according to all figures by means of engineering for her salvation.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Remember that it is formed in the mother's womb from embryos, and some are aborted.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Some are formed in the mother one, two, three, four and five, and already it is necessary that a woman aborts six times, and another seven to all, which causes it to be made by measurement of the glorious wise men.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all this time I have been saying that it is in the science of the mother because it is a strong light to that little thing which seems like water, and therefore pause there at the water.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter LXVII.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	Of the child's extraction when it is dead.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you heal the child who is dead in the womb with water that I have mentioned in the division of medication and it is not a matter of external exit, then you must use surgery on the mother, for you consider whether the woman is of sound health, and she is not exposed to an accident for which she may be a loss.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	The woman should be placed on her back, with her head slightly raised and her legs elevated.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	The minister should hold her two parts in place so that the contents of her womb do not spread out during the extraction of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	Then moisten the mother’s mouth with honey, and add to it a little oil of aloes and fenugreek and seed of lyme.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	Then anoint the mother’s hands with these oils and ointments, and place her hand at ease on the womb so that the fingers rest on the fetus.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	Then place it in a convenient spot: then consider if the fetus is ready to be delivered; then you can put your fingers on its neck, or on its collarbone, or in its mouth, or on its palate, or leave them on its beard, or on the pit of the stomach, or on the ribs, or near the hips.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	But if it is to be delivered in the feet, then place it either in the pentene (footbed) or near the midriff of the body.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	Then let her keep the finger on the right hand, and place the bent elbow in that spot between the fingers of the left hand; then, with ease, introduce the finger into one of these spots which we have mentioned, until it reaches the cause of the swelling.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	Then place another finger in apposition with it, or the third if necessary, that is to say, so as to create a hook, and not an extension, following the directions of the doctor only then.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And if it is necessary that its removal be complete at once, so that the swelling of the body may be relieved immediately with a single extraction.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And if it is necessary that its extraction be soft; and if a part of it has been retained, then the woman should anoint herself with oil, and gently turn herself so as to reverse the water that has been retained.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Then if the fetus has come out in part, let the fingers be exchanged for another spot where it is to be delivered, and do this repeatedly until the entire fetus is delivered.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	But if the hand is in front of the other, and it cannot be reduced by the constriction; then let it be wrapped around itself, and extract it piece by piece until the whole is delivered, and mark it or the joint of the hand or the wrist.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And finally cut off the other hand and both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	But if the head of the fetus is large, or the constriction comes in its delivery, or it is caught up in the water, then introduce an instrument called an 'unclinger', the shape of which will correspond to the shapes of the other instruments in the chapter that deals with this.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And if the head of the fetus is large by nature, then mark it with a stiletto or an unclinger as we have said above; and with forceps extract the bones.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	But if the head has come out and is constricted at the pit of the stomach, then cut it open so that the moisture that is in the feet may flow out.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	But if this does not cause complication or delay in its delivery, then you can cut off the head at once as quickly as possible.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	But if the fetus that has been left in the womb is pus or is in the bowel, then pierce it so that the moisture that is inside it may flow out.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	But if the fetus is on top of the legs, then its gravity will easily bring it down and its direction to the mother’s mouth is also easy.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	But if the fetus is constricted at the navel, then extract it with cloth wrapped around your hand, and cut open the navel so that the moisture that is in it may flow out.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	But if the other members remain obstinate and turn towards the head, then let the woman place her left hand; but if the mother’s mouth is open, then introduce the hand into the throat of the woman, and with it pick up the head, and with the fingers grab one or two fingers at a time, and pull them back into the mouth.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	But if the mother’s mouth is constricted by pus due to an ulcer, then do not touch it with your hand; instead, administer a stream of watery liquids.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And apply plasters; and follow the patient with water that softens and moistens.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	But if the fetus is on top of the ribs, then, if possible, let it be wriggled; and water that softens the body should also be applied to the live fetus.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	If water cannot reach it, then cut it off into pieces, and extract it.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	Then let there be no delay in delivering the second child.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed your entire procedure, then administer the water for cleaning that we mentioned above in regards to the woman.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	If there is bleeding during delivery, then stop it with stiff water and administer the other cure.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And I have already seen a woman in her womb with a dead fetus, and another live fetus that is being born; and the second one was born dead.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	Then there occurred a long time of pus due to an ulcer on the womb, and it became inflamed inside until it burst, and then it began to bleed.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And he was called to treat him, and he treated him for a long time, but the plague did not become fixed.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then you used some strong plasters for the purpose of attraction, and broke one bone from it, and let a few days go by, and another bone was broken; and I was amazed that there was not a bone in her womb.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	Then you realized that they were the bones of the dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Then you treated the plague with medicine, and extracted a few bones from it; the woman was in her own hands, and I have been treating her for a long time, and a small bit of blood came out of her.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And I did not find this strange, but I found that in water there is wisdom and help for the woman through medicine administered by hand.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Of the shapes of instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	The shape of a spinning top by which the mother is turned:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the shape of strength with which the free ones are grasped; and with this grip, two spins are made in two ends of two fetuses.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	But this spinning top may be more subtle than the previous one, and it may be made of wood or metal or leather.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And the length of each stick is a palm and a half; and the distance between them is a palm and a quarter; and the width of the top is two palms wide; and the thickness of the wood or leather is a palm and a half wide.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two additions are inserted into the mouth of the mother so that she is opened up when you turn the two prescribed wheels.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	A different shape, similar to that of a small pestle, and then made light:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	Then make it from ebony or boy's wood according to the appearance of forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	However, at the end there are two additions as well, and the length of these additions is a palm, and their width is two fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open the mother, then place her with her legs hanging down, and cover her with a cloth.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	Then open your hand with the instrument as you would with a pair of pliers according to the quantity that you want of the impression of the mouth of the mother before the master tells you to stop.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The shape of the wheel that they told the ancients:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	A shape that is driven by force:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	A shape of a hammer that crushes the head:
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is assembled with forceps on the end, as often as needed, and some are made long, also with forceps according to this shape, as often as needed, which are inserted and carved, and then they are crushed and inscribed.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	A small shape of a hammer:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	A single-pronged hammer:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	A double-pronged hammer:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	A shape of pliers, with which the head of the object is crushed between the prongs:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	A double-ended hammer with a cuthead:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Two long hammers:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All of these instruments are used, and when less is needed of the substance of that one and it is prepared by the craftsman, how much is easier to do the operation and how much fewer hands it needs for its quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And you should not use those instruments anymore once you know how to operate without them, because the need for those is not justified.
De extraccio de la segondina.	Of extraction of the second one.
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second is retained, it should be commanded to the mother that she hold her breath, and if it is too much, it will come out, it is good.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if not, then take a branch and pierce the cover with it, and stop it in that place with care and roughness, and anoint it with camomile and sicodes Arabic, and cassia lignum and Staeura.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All of these herbs or some of them are immersed in water in the branch, and stop it over the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	Then place a tube of camomile into the mouth of the mother, and hold it so that the vapor goes into the cavity of the mother.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	Then make her sneeze with a handkerchief held close to her face, and the second one will be blown out.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	If this cure does not work and the second one is not blown out, then order the mother to dip her left hand in olive oil or a mixture of althaea, and insert it into her mouth, and search for the second one, and when she finds it, remove it little by little according to what is necessary so that the mother does not hurt herself with the attraction of wind.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	And let her switch sides easily.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	Then adjust the quantity of attraction, because she will obey and avoid sticking to things.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mouth of the mother is blocked, then we have already described the cure with sneezing and the medication of the branch with herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	If the second one is not blown out with all of these means, then you must remember that whatever comes out of the mouth of the mother lies on the floor, and then crush it with oil and honey, and taste it; because this will make it stick to her teeth, dry it, and blow it out.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	Then when it is crushed, it has a bad smell to the head and the stomach, and the mother swallows it; and then order that it be administered sublingually and conveniently with water.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	Some of the Ancients have already prescribed sublingual administration of nasaltor and dried fig.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	A shape of an instrument that is used to administer nasaltor to the woman, which is effective for menstruation and the second one:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	A pot of vinegar or iron.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	Then the sharp end should be inserted into the cavity, and the wide end should be placed over the fire, and sublingual administration should be made on the fire braids.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	Then hold it so that it is consumed by sublingual administration and repeat as needed.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	Of cure for the bottom of the unperforated child.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	The bottom of the child is not perforated, and these are treated with a subtle and soothing mixture.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then order the mother to pierce her own bottom with that mixture; and if not, pierce it with a sharp hammer, and be careful not to touch her anus.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	Then place the heated, oil-soaked cloth over that area and then treat it with a mixture of honey.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	If you fear that it may be pierced, then place a tube of caustic dye in motz days, and stop it when the child wants to urinate.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	Then that bottom may be pierced by consolidation of plague or abscess; if that consolidation is inscribed, and then it is cured with water that we have described with the medicine and the pound.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	Of cure for the fistulas that involve the genitals.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	Fistulas involving the genitals are treated with a mixture of oil and honey, and grossness is added according to what involves the anus or in the space between the genitals.
E es una fistula o motas.	Then it is a fistula or motas.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	With that mixture, it is ancient and runs from the watery white pus or subtle puss, and some of these fistulas are penetrant.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those that penetrate are recognized by water that is blown out from them due to wind and exit with it; and some times the exit of water is helped by a wind, and they come out quickly.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And some of these fistulas are hidden in the space that penetrates into the bladder, and within the meat of the testicle; and some of them penetrate into the joint of the cocksuckers, and into the neck of the scrotum.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And water that is conoguda from a fistula that penetrates into the buttocks and does not penetrate, you put the child's bottom in it, and try gently to pierce the fistula when it is not painful.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	If that is painful, then insert a sharp object into the fistula gently when you feel the pain or the hair on the child's bottom.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel that or it does not come out with the tube for any reason of passage or wind; then you will know that it is non-penetrant, and then continue with the cure.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	When the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the meat of the testicle, then the sign of it is certainly of urine from that place and prohibition to go there so that the medicine does not solidify.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	If it is penetrating within the joint of the thigh or within the bone and causes pain in the circulation, then its indication is that the tentation was penetrating here if there is not a turbulence within the bone, and causes pain in the circulation of the exit; and that it always remains injured; and that it does not help with that medicine, nor is strengthened by drinking.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all these penetrating ulcers there is no cure for everything, and the cure of those is work and vanity of the doctors on which they are closed.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	But in that which is not penetrating and does not age, cure by iron is expected according to what you recommended, and what I have already done and tried.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And the patient lies between your two thighs and raises his legs within them, the spaces are inclined toward the abdomen of him, and then put a plunger or iron if there is turbulence, so that you know the place where the tentation enters.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if it feels a patient's hip, then cover that you put your hand in the hip.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel in the patient' hip that the tentation has already penetrated through it, or between the hip and some flesh or meat, then know for sure that it is penetrating; and do not work with that, because it is not cured with that, as I have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	But however, some say that it heals in some men quickly.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And of the medicine by which is hoped for quick healing is that you ignite a subtle cautery according to the width of the ulcer, and then put it into the ulcer until it enters through the hip; and repeat it twice or three times until you know that all those injured flesh that is like feathers of an eagle has closed.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And that one is cured with calumes wrapped in a blanket until all the flesh that is aderent has closed, and that one is cured with medicines that generate and consolidate flesh, and if it is healed, it is good; and if not, it is not cured with any other cure.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if the tentation enters and does not penetrate into the hip that is in the hip, and between it and the tentation that is a little flesh or meat, and sometimes the ulcer on what part of the skin, then dry the skin from the beginning of the ulcer, then cut the skin with a sharp knife, and if you see that it is drying, then know that the tentation has been cut in that place where the end of the tentation has reached; and by the tentation it is freed and goes away.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And then wash those ulcerated flesh that are like tubes of an eagle's penises, and they do not get irritated by any other cause.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	But if there is a flow of blood several times that comes between you and your work when you are cutting those flesh, then the water that is hot or the acute medicine is to be cauterized by fire or medicine, because cauterization by fire adjusts well: so it is aderent from those flesh that are close, and removes the scald of humidity.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And that one is cured with calumes wrapped in a border or a thread until the place gets dry, and then it cures the plague with iron that hardens flesh and generates and consolidar.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And thus medicines in which there is strictness and excision; and when restored, it is healed, and you do not fear recurrence.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	But if the ulcer has already penetrated into the hip and its length is on the surface of the flesh, then put your hand in the hip and examine it.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And if the tentation is a hundred and between you and it is a little meat or flesh, and it is about to penetrate, then do not operate on it unless by means of trust and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	The cause is to administer it in it in one of three ways: or cauterize it as I have said; or dry it up within that you can get into the hollows and the proper cure comes; and do not process with a cut because you will not injure the skin containing the hip, and you will arrive at the desire of the one who wants to; and then heal it with water which I have said because strong man cures; or extend that little meat and make that pus which you dry up within that you can get into the hollows, as I have said, or with the tentation or with another instrument with a sharp extremities, and then wash those ulcerated flesh that are in the cut within the hip, as I have said, or with the tentation or with another instrument of sharp extremities, and then dry those flesh that are in the cut within the hip, as I have said; and then try to make the restoration of all the plague with a cut, and if the pus hole above does not consolidate, and the ulcer opens again at the beginning of the hip, and the little pus goes up through it.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And some ulcers are cured in this way: it is when you put the tentation into the ulcer, and it is at the hip's side on the surface of the flesh toward the cord, and then take an attempt with a sharp point, which is as when you prepare the threads according to this form:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	And then enter into that veil wrapped in five fields or put your hand into it; and then enter the tentation into the ulcer within that you can get into its hollows.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	But if it is penetrating into the hip' side inward, then you take the veil from that and put your hand in it; and then enter the tentation into the ulcer within that you can get into its hollows.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And then heal the plague within that it is consolidated and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	But if the hole of the ulcer is not penetrating, then do so in some way that you prepare it, but not inside it, because it is not to you that you make it pass so that you do not injure the skin; and then do so within that it is healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The form of a spike with which the ulcer is divided: its curvature is sharp and the other part is not-sharp, so that you do not injure what is necessary, as when it happens sometimes.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	Suturing of hemorrhoids in which blood runs in the incision of those.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Emorrhoids are like grass that grows in the hip, and those are with a thick skin.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And they are small and large, and the blood runs from them at the same time and is one, and they are little, and outside of the hip, and in its extremities.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	But those that are outside of the hip are according to the middle of a little humidity, from which runs yellow water or a little blood constantly on the skin, and according to the color of the skin.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the cure of that which is inside the hip is to order for the patient to lie on his side and to press it until the hip burns, and the hemorrhoids appear to you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you cut yourself and hang them by a nail that you have or with your own fingernail, and then cut those veins.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	But if the fingernails do not have them because of their humidity and softness, then take them with a sharp nail or a piece of wool or a flannel, and cut those veins with your fingers, and then wash those and sprinkle over them some dust after cutting, so that they are like those in a place of cauterization; or cauterize them according to what has been said.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And so continue with the cure until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the buttock does not yield to exit, then cut the hernia in half with a sharp knife, and wash it with that water which is in the buttock and which yields to exit easily when the hernia is cut.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	If the haemorrhoids protrude from the buttock, then the cause of them is easily removed, and it is because you have taken them with your finger, or with a scalpel, and cut them, and so continue with the cure until they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And whoever wishes to make an incision, follow this method: take a tightly wrapped cord and insert it into a needle, and then extract the hemorrhoids by their parts, and make the needle penetrate into the root of the other part, and wrap the two ends of the cord around the part below the needle, and then release the knot; and then firmly tighten the knot, and then remove the cord and extract the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And let the water run over all of them, and leave one of them untouched, so that the excess blood flows from that one.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	Then place a cloth drenched in rose oil or wax over the buttocks, and place that one over the buttock and order the patient to lie down.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then leave that one in a box; and when it falls, cure them with oil or with another cure until they are healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	Of treatment of fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	It is seen that such things happen due to a wound or by nature's constriction.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And since such things are not effective in that medicine, then it is said that you should cut them with a spatum or with your finger, so that they bleed profusely from above, and this prevents their solidification; and so continue with the cure until they are consolidated.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Then you should cut them with a sharp razor more violently than the first, since the pain of the first incision will prevent them from healing; and so continue with the cure until they are healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	Of treatment of almahiram, thus is the end.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	Be aware that almahiram is a final cure, and it is not unless the color of the body becomes similar to the tip of a clove, and it affects the whole body, especially the feet and the legs, and through them one should experience pain in general.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And then it is said that the water which is in the circle of the ring should be cut with a pair of scissors or with a scalpel, and removed from its root; and so continue with the cure.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you wish, cauterize the second one which precedes the first in the head.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	A small, round, sharp-edged, raised mole is often seen on the surface of the body, and it is sometimes found in children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	The cure for him is to spread him and cut him, or to extract him with a string that binds him.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you wish, cauterize the water, as has been said, with fire or with acute medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And they are then eradicated, face up or down, with the instrument which I will describe.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	A small, round, rough mole is often seen on the surface of the body, and when it comes in contact with it, it feels like a tiny burn; and it forms a blister on the skin.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	The cure for him is to take a pen of cow or of bull, and make it hard, and place that one over the mole which is enclosed by its circle; and then turn your hand around the pen so that water runs from the circle of the mole; and then cut the water with the pen within the circle of the mole, and place your hand over the area where the mole was, and eradicate the mole from its root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, make water run through an iron or brass tube according to this form:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	The opening of the tube should be small, dull (if it is not pierced), wrapped in such a way that it does not damage the tube, and its revolution should be made by the hand.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you wish, cauterize the mole according to this which is said in cauterization of atheyl in the head.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	Of the shape of the instruments that are used to give a cutting.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Some are given a cutting of silver or lead or of melted brass or hammered ; and some are given small instruments and large according to those which are used, since the instrument which is used in the treatment of small children should be small; and that of the instrument which is painful or painful to the patient, the cuts should be small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The shape of a large cut and a small one:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The top of the tube should be wide according to this method: and it should be distinct where the bag is attached in such a way that it does not touch the tube.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the end of the tube which enters the buttock should be dull  (if it is not open) and sharp at its tip; and there should be two turns on one side, and a turn on the other, and the turn should be wider or narrower according to the thickness of the rays and larger one should be small.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And the bag in which the medicines of animal or sheep's wool are placed should be large and its handle should be a palm-sized; and the end of the tube should be wrapped around the handle.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And it should be pierced with sharp turns as it is made to revolve; and if the space between the turns is wide, then the thickness of the tube.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And so insert it into the sharp turns with a strong thread of oil, and the thread should be of the quality which you fill the bag with medicine, that it is scalded according to the quantity of the tolerance of the patient; and beware that it is not too long or too short.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	And then the patient is placed on his back, and his legs are raised up, and a sheet is placed under them, and the minister takes the bag and squeezes it with two hands and expresses it into the budel with all vigour until all of the water which is in the cutting comes out; and then remove the cutting and take away the patient.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine forces it to sleep, then take as much as it can; and if it sleeps for a long time, then it should be followed with a wakefulness in the morning.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	And if you cut it with salt water and sleep it, then repeat the cure until it is healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if in the buttock there are painful hemorrhoids or blisters, then use a cutting with a sharp edge and a small one, since the children are judged by those.
De curacio de las plaguas.	Of treatment of wounds.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	You have said and I will describe the division of treatment of wounds which is suitable for free ones, and I will describe it as follows:
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Thus I say that the wounds are different according to where they are made and according to the place where they occur.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes for which the wounds occur are as follows: by a fall from a height, or an incision of a knife, or a cut with a lance, or an axe, or an arrow, or similar to those which are the causes of the wounds.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	May the plagues that are in the places of the body also be with these plagues which come over the head, or collarbone, or foot, or belly, or back, and similar to those of the members.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And I recommend the cure of some plagues so that this reasoning and disorder about other plagues stops.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And I will begin with the plagues of the head, since the recollection of the components will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Then say that when it happens in the head simple plague and is not a fracture, consider: if it is by consumption of food or by similarity, and has already trinquada the knuckle so only and is a great plague and you are afraid about this patient having an apoplexy, then you get up and bleed the head quickly, and do not delay; and extracts according to the amount of the virtue of him if there is no more reason to bleed, greater if the disease that has come out from the plague is little.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And be the bloodletting of the opposite of the infected part; and keep the patient from repletive things, and from strong drinks.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	May if there is a prohibition of any cause, then it is diminished by the food and do not approach meat or wine.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And pause on the plague, if it happens to him apoplexy in oil rosy only or in wine in which is stipticated.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	May if it is sure of apoplexy in oil, then pause on the plague, if it is new why he has third and the air has not changed that powder which I recommend to apply lightly.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed that, then pause on the back in oil until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	May if the plague is great or is by incision of knife and by similarity, and their lips are not closed by pustules, then adjust them with surgery according to what I recommend about the suture of them.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	May if the plague has already been discovered from the bone and it is not retaining it but only a small stopper, then cut it off and cure the plague with medicines and restore the meat to its place of knuckle, and order to the patient that he eats drinks in which it is grossness: capons e formens coyts and similar to them, within that it is compost.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if there is putrefaction in the knuckle and does not adhere to the bone, then you cut all of it off and flush it with water, and cure it.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	May if these plagues are an artery or vein from which a flow of blood may come out, and is not extinguished by medicines, then you inquire about the artery, and if there is any non-extinguishment, then you cut it with a scalpel, or pierce it; and if necessity causes that what we have said does not respond, then you cauterize it within that the disease be extinguished.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these plagues are simple and small, the cause of them is ignorance; and if you sprinkle on them this powder, since solidified before that the air changes those.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	And the way of the powder is this: take an oil of a split part, two splits of dragon's blood, three splits of non-extinguished matter; all mixed together and shaken, and if the plague is filled with it, and constrained by good contraction within that it does not adhere to it, and coagulated with the third.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And you tighten that on top of it with powder and let it sit there, and do not remove it while it is like this that it does not apoplexy, since it has not received the medicine within that it is healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And any time you make water only with caution, when it is not at your place in present oil and dragon's blood.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And this operation in the great plagues when you consider that it is necessary to pause on them and be straightened, and are only plagues recently of their third part, whose air has not changed those.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has altered them, and especially when it is in summer time, then do not put this powder on their position, but instead, cure those with water that we have said, perhaps you pause on their legs covered with a kind of oil which does not adhere to them, or you pause on their wrists with flour of bread soaked in water within that it creates a kind of poultice; and cure those with the other cure within that they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	May if it happens to you on a fracture plague in bone, and it is small, then you extract water with gestures.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And I will direct the cure of fractures in the head in poison.
De las plaguas del col.	Of the neck plagues.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	May if it happens to you on a neck plague, then it is not in its difference of medicine, and between the head plague when it is simple.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	May if the nerves of the neck are incised or arterial, then they are not in their difference of medicine but are avoided with water that does violent stypticism, perhaps with vinegar and similar to them because it is hot on the nerves and contraction there.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And you do not pause on the plague for any reason of all break, since the substance of the nerves is broken and the continuation of it is at the neck, which is the pus of all members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if water with the medicine is used, perhaps with an infusion of rose water or not-rose water, and wash it when it is washed with double water and the other roots are poured as follows, and wet them.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	May if the plague is great, then administer surgery, or cut the lips of it, and cure it with powder within that it is healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	May if the plague is deep or happens to it at the pus that has been softened, then pierce it in its most depressed place.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	May if the plague has already been incised into an artery and there is a flow of blood coming out, then you separate or dry it up, or pierce it, or cauterize it if necessity forces you to water.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	May if the bones of the jaw have already been incised and all the veins of the neck are saved, then you adjust the lips of the knuckle with surgery on the hair of it and do not touch that; before equalizing that and reducing it to its natural shape, and let it sit for a few days; and cure it with water in which stypticism and excitement have been added within that it is healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	May if the plague has already begun to decay in bone, then beat that, and if there are fragments of it, extract all that you can; and if water is not fitted, let it sit within that the plague decays, and separate it and the relief from it is made.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the plague is new then sprinkle on it the powder which I have recommended to you.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	May if the plague has been fated as a fistula, then cure it with water in which the recollection will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Of neck plagues or similar to them when they happen between the shoulders and are fated as a wound, or as a cut, or as a lance, or similar.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a stab with a sword or a cut, and its depth, then consider if the patient faints; then you will know that the plague is deadly.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if it is not deep and the plague is new why he has third, then you pause in it the powder for the first time, and do not tighten it so that the plague does not adhere to the patient in the depth of it and returns to its heart, and let it sit a few days; and free those two times each day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the needle is not at your hand, then place it in the opening of the pouch where water collects so that it sucks out moisture; and have the patient sleep on the pouch so that water runs out into him.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	Or if three days or more have passed since the poultice has been applied to the patient and no spasms or tremors occur in his body or constriction of his bowels, and at times other good conditions are present in him, then know that the poultice is effective; and then treat it with cold water and internal medicine until he is cured.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	Or if the patient's recovery is delayed and the wound has been open for a long time, then know that it has become a fistula; treat it therefore with the root.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	Or if the poultice is due to a cut or knife wound, and it is simple on the surface of the foot or leg, then treat it with water that has been preceded by suturing, if it is deep, or with powder, if it is shallow.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	Or if it has already been eaten into the bone, and there are only a few pieces left in the wound, then twist the poultice and draw out those pieces with a hook, if they are separate.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	Or if they are not separate, then leave them in place, as it is easier to remove the poultice than to extract the pieces from within.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And of other accidental poultices on the other members, the cure is the same as that which has been said for this one.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of poultices for the womb.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The discomfort that occurs in the womb is great, slight, or intermittent.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	Of great obstructions, the intestine or nerves of the intestine are involved, causing an interference with their function and their suture becoming more violent and more delicate.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	A small obstruction is difficult to treat in any way, and if you do not remove the cause of their obstruction from its place soon, for it will become more difficult, because it becomes thick and difficult because of the instrument's involvement.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	The middle obstruction is the best to deal with, because in this case the reduction of the intestine is not difficult; on the other hand, if it were a small or great obstruction, it would be more difficult to treat, as has been said above.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And know that a suture of the womb is second only to four ways; two sutures are common to all other wounds of the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And two more proper sutures communicate with the rest of the poultices; however, they are only proper for the wound of the womb.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	I also recommend to you each exposure and description.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Then say that when the poultice is small and there is no cause of the intestine to be removed from it, and it is difficult to reduce it, then it is in one of two ways: either because of the smallness of the obstruction as we have said, or because the intestine is inflated towards the bowels by the cold air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And so, when water is like this, then know that you should cut it off, rather than to immerse a sponge or a damp cloth in warm water, or to take water from the sea, and hyssop, and spearmint, and immerse it into the intestine, so that the inflammation is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	Some of these water are also effective in resolving the inflammation, and it is better to use these than warm water alone for this purpose.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And then know that if you see the inflammation is resolved, then immerse the intestine into water in which it was laid up and dried, because by water it is relieved for a few causes.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	Or if the intestine cannot be cured with this treatment, then cut off the obstruction with a small instrument where the hemorrhoids are inserted.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	The first cure is the best, because it is proper that there be no section, and no occupation of drying it out unless necessary and depleting.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	As for the instrument, consider its shape:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	The one side of the instrument is acute, and the other is not acute, and the end is delicate; it should not be at the end of a spikelet, because it would be obtuse, and slightly blunt.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And if the poultice is enlarged and the intestine protrudes, then know that the reduction of it should be according to its natural shape in its place; if possible on top of it, because the best is:
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	Or if the obstruction is wide and in the lower part of the abdomen, then place the patient on his back, and raise his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then place the head of the patient higher than the feet.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And apparently, if the obstruction is in either of the two parts of the abdomen, then pause your attention and consideration at all times so that the part where the poultice is may be higher than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And then know how to administer water in the large and small poultices.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	In small poultices, prepare water as you see fit; and place the instrument between your fingers, which has the whole obstruction under it and adjusts the edges of it; and uncover that part to where you see the suture, if there is any cause of the obstruction from its place.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	And this is the common way of suturing: one in which you take the needle, or count the needle according to the quantity of the width of the poultice; and then leave the end of the obstruction on the ring finger, and tighten the needle, or another that you do not insert into the two extremities of the knot, both extremities of the line that is within the two extremities, so that it may penetrate that part; and you have added two extremities to the knot and made four orders.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And then leave the end of the stitch double-knotted, and then add two extremities together, and then add two sides to the knot, and then leave that part; and then take the thread back to where you want it, and then tie that thread tightly around the other; and then add the width of the thread to the end of the stitch; and then tie that thread as well; and do not cease to cut the thread if necessity dictates until you have completed the entire construction of the poultice.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And let the fine and delicate needles pass smoothly through the flesh, because the delicate needles pierce it easily; and the thick ones are difficult to wrap in a knot, so that by water they become fine and subtle and thick.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And know that the needle is not fixed to two extremities of the knot next to each other, so that the flesh is not easily pierced and the poultice does not fall apart before it is consolidated.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And do not make long stitches, lest the poultice be prevented from being consolidated.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And then cut off the ends of the stitches so that the patient does not feel them; and place the stitches between the expanded particles of all parts, which have the extremities of the needles; and leave them where you know that the poultice is already consolidated.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	And these ways of stitching with needles are most convenient in small poultices, because you need only one needle or two or three threads.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	Or the second stitch is similar: and you treat it with four extremities, of the knot and two extremities of the line, in one thread, with a needle that is wrapped up in the thread, in subtility and thickness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And when I place the needle into these four extremities, return the needle from that middle point where you start it, so that the thread pulls back up from its low point to the plica, so that the suture is a good and strong suture of cloth where the cloths are tight.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And put between each stitch the quantity of the thickness of this thread.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this stitch will hold the men together.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And with this stitch I sewed the plica which was broken in a man in his belly, which had been struck by a knife, and it was the breaking of the main plica, two palms from its main side, and it was the rupture of the main member; and then I reduced that which had broken up the main part for 22 hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the plica was consolidated in the space of 15 days or so, and I healed it; and then there were pus and it turned black, and its condition changed.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And the other members had not healed; and for a miracle it was cured, because I did not heal that with ointment, for it was in a place where ointment is not attracted or any medicine, but I applied a wet cloth twice a day and washed it with cold water until it was healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	But I made two special stitches according to the description of the Parable.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And that you begin the stitch with the thread from the outside, and push the needle from the inside to the outside.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And so with the needle penetrating into the thread and in the length of all the body, leaving the end of the knot where you have inserted the needle; and make the needle penetrate from the inside to the outside at the other extreme part of the member.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And so when you have made that penetration, then you make another penetration twice in the extreme part of the member from the inside to the outside; and leave the end of the knot where you have inserted the needle; and make the needle penetrate from the inside to the outside at the other extreme part of the member.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And make your penetration with that which makes that penetration in the knot at the extreme part of the member which is in the inside until all that penetrates.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	Then begin the stitch from that side, and pull the needle out at the extreme part which is in the inside of the member, and leave the thread with the knot; then bring the needle from the other side to the extreme part of the member; and take the needle out of that knot.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And make a cut here and there, and make another cut beside it, until you have cut all that which is in front according to this example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the whole of this method of stitch is that you sew with the stitches which are on the skin, cutting all that which is in front according to the example; and making a complete cut on the other side.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	But the second species of stitch is its own name, and this is according to its speech and by its description; that you sew with the second thread on which you add all the width to the other side in a convenient way for nature; and apply the extreme part of one side to the extreme part of the other side, and so it is made according to what I have told you.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	Then take the needle to the extreme part of your thread at your next side, and make that penetration from the inside in two parts of the member; and then return the needle and make that penetration from the outside in two parts of the member.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	Then return those covers, and make that penetration from the inside of one part to the outside in another two parts of the member; and then return those covers, and make that penetration from the outside of one part to the inside in two other parts of the member which are on the opposite side.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this method of stitching is better than the common stitch; and it is a stitch from which I have recalled the description.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the speech of Guilia
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And they call it a stitch of the belly which is made with two needles; so you insert it in these two threads, and begin to make the penetration with the needle which comes from outside, and make that penetration in the other side according to the stitch of those which I have described; and so it is sewed.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	You should know that when there is a rupture in the middle part of the belly, then the stitch of this place is more difficult than that of the other parts of the belly.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	And the judgment of medicine for the plague is according to the other judgments.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	And the cause is that when you achieve the recent plague before it changes the air which affects that, and reduce the budel and sew it up; then put a powder on it.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	If the air has already changed the plague, then put on it powder which is in your possession until it changes its color and the threads are firm; so that they are consolidated in the middle part; and so heal it as you cure the other plagues, until it is healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	But if you do not have medicines, then put on it for a few days, because it starts to burn, and change the cloth twice a day; and so heal it as you teach it, until it is healed, because you do not need other medicine in these circumstances when the plagues are simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	But if you fear that the common plague will spread to the main members, then dip wool in wet oil of quality, or in rose water; and put it on the skin which is between the folds and leave it there.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if you feel pain or rot in the belly; because it is a sign that something is wrong there, then rub on it with black tar; and more so if the decay has reached the belly and has caused an opening inside it.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	You should know that the one who is thick in the belly is of a little healing; and that which is in thin bellies has more rot.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And it is difficult to heal because the belly which is called “gegunu” does not receive any healing of the plague which comes into it from all sides; and that is due to the great number of veins which are in it, and its size, which is small in those members, and its proximity to nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	But if the cloth which you are using is infected with the plague, and you achieve it recently, then reduce it according to your description with which you reduce the bellies in the middle part.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	But if it is passed to that space and it has turned white or black, then you string up that thread on the area which is broken; so that blood flows from that place, because in that cloth are veins and arteries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	Then you will cut it off again; and place two ends of the thread hanging down from the side of the space where the plague comes out, so that there is no attraction for it; because in that cloth are veins which come out and produce a bad smell of the plague.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remembering the plagues when they happened in the belly.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When a disruption happens in the belly and it is small, then it is possible that it will be restored in some men; because I have seen one who was struck by a lance in his belly from within; and that was the main plague of the right side of the belly, and the plague was old and had caused an opening; and it went out from it and produced a bad smell and heat.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Then, if I understood correctly, I continued with the treatment even though it was not yet completely healed because its essence is to sublimate that which heals and consolidates the place.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And I placed the patient on their back in such a position that the injury was raised above his navel; and I did not allow food or drink to enter by mouth, nor did I allow them to go out or exercise themselves by moving or drinking water; and I kept between them and the injury.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And some experienced people have said that when they cut into the hernia and it is small, then cover it in this way: you take two knots; and you adjust the two lips of the hernia and place one knot over those; so, when you put them on and tighten them with your hand, you cut off the top of him because it adheres and does not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	Then place another knot next to the first one, and do not stop making knots according to the amount of hernia that is there.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	Then cut off that knot and sew the hernia; and if there is any remnant of the hernia left, then wrap it up so that the hernia is healed; and do not cause any harm to the patient at all.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the hernia is caused by a thin thread that comes out of the hernia's base from the animal, because it is like a sharp needle; and it is that you take the end of these hernia threads, and if one is very thin, and you wrap the end of it with a thread, and you insert that thread into needles and sew it up with it; and then reduce it to healing.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	This method of sewing with knots is only another way, a different way, of trust and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	But if the hernia is large and wide, mainly because it is in a thin hernia; because then there is only one way to sublimate, not to heal completely.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	Of treatment for gout and fistula.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	Do you know that any injury or abscess that is covered and gets older, and becomes a wound, not consolidated, always walks with its arm outstretched, and does not heal; then it is called a fistula in all members, and we call it gout.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And a fistula, according to its truth, is a deep, hard, white wound that does not hurt, and which is hollow; and therefore it is called "the pain of the fistula", that is, the ache.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And it is in men who are moist, which walks with its arm outstretched; and the moisture is absorbed in a few hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	Some of this moisture is evaporated, and it is little, and it is thick, and it is subtle.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And I have already told you about the division of flesh, then when I said that wounds that are not healed or in raw flesh, it is not because of one of these nine things: because of bad circulation of blood; or because of evil; because between it and the lips there is hard flesh, which prevents the birth of flesh; or because it is thick; or because this wound itself is infectious and the matter that comes out of it is of a bad quality; or because the medicine used in its treatment is inappropriate in its effects; or because corruption spreads in the region, and therefore it is a pestilence; or because of the property of the region, for example, when a person goes to Zaragoza, where digestion of malicious substances is difficult, and it takes a long time to heal such wounds through nature's own properties; or because one has an ear of corn, or many bones.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	These are all the causes that I have mentioned, and they are explained in detail, as well as how to treat them through medicine in the division of flesh.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And so I told you about the treatment of a fistula, which is done by surgery with the hand.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	Do you know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body; because some of them reach the veins and arteries, or the nerves, or the cipha (spinal cord), or the bowel, or any of the sides of the ribs, or one of the joints composed of two bones joined together by cartilage; and they are similar to those that affect the main members and their neighbors.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And therefore those fistulas that occur in this way are of difficult healing; they do not respond to treatment or work, and ignorance is their consequence.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	If any of these fistulas is too deep to reach those places that are mentioned, and you wait and trust in the healing; and if you want to gain knowledge of them, then try to stretch or cut it, and if the fistula follows a course through surgery, and you examine it carefully.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	But if the fistula is twisted, then investigate it with a thin needle, because a needle that rises and falls in weight is suitable for bending the twists of the fistula.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula has become hard, it is not in your power to do any signs on it with a needle.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Then clean the opening with a strong solution, because the moisture that you use to clean it will also go through the other openings and run off.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And then ask carefully, according to which method you can recognize if there are any bones or nerves; and this fistula is distant or close to the surface, or it is a fistula with only one opening and it is over the whole body, from top to bottom; and if you want to examine it thoroughly, then remove it completely, taking care not to hurt yourself.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have considered all these causes at the same time, then proceed with confidence to the treatment: and it is that you consider whether this fistula appears close to the surface of the flesh, or far from the joints; or if it is next to nerves, arteries, or veins; or any of the parts mentioned before.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then clean the fistula according to what I have told you about its treatment; and let that water flow through it, and from the flesh, and into the openings of the flesh; and let it be cured that which needs to be healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	But if the fistula is very deep, and follows a course, then cut it as much as you can; and remove all of its corrupted flesh; and insert sharp instruments wrapped in strong medicine; and put those into the hollow of the fistula, which you have cut open.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	Then pour that medicine into the opening of the fistula, so that it corrupts all that is inside because of its sharp nature.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And then restore that with what you have to make healthy flesh grow within the fistula, which needs to be healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	But if it is not healed by water, then you must cauterize it according to what we have described.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	But if the cause of the fistula is bone; and you must investigate it and clean it according to what we have described; and if you do not stop it from affecting any vein, nerve, or main member, as we have mentioned before.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is discovered in your presence and it is dark and corroded; then cut off that piece of bone that is corrupted; and then heal that with water, which needs to be cured.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it is not healed and walks with its arm outstretched, as it does when it is completely cured; then you know that you have not achieved the full eradication of corruption; and then examine it carefully and precisely again; and then restore that which has been damaged by the last strong force, and thus heal it.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And if it is cured, then good; but if not, know that corruption lies far within the body, which cannot be reached, and so you have only to remove that.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the bone is corrupted, then it is small, or it is possible for you to reach that, then do so with fine tweezers, which need to be directed towards water.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if there are many bones, then carefully extract all of them, and do not leave any cause to your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	But if you have any cause of the moisture, and in their incision there is no fear or mistake, then cut those ligaments or flesh if they are here, and free the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	But if you are not prepared to open the bones of your body, then pause over the water that can be reached, and leave that water within which is the flesh and ligaments, and keep the water from being hardened, and the section that you have made in your operation shall be forced.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	And so, if you fear, then pause over the trissat-oiled bed, or the Egyptian oil bed, or one of the green oils, because when those ligaments are being poured, and the bones are separated from them, and that attraction is being removed.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	But if it is a large bone, then such as of the back or of the hips or similar to those, and that water which is corrupted is only on the surface of it, then carefully cut off that blackness and corruption, and restore the water.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	But if that water which is corrupted is a great mass, and corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to stop up that water, and to cut all within that place where corruption has come, and then heal that which has become hardened.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I recommend to you that you give this water to a man in his space so that he pauses it for example and helps your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	A young man of around 30 years old, to whom pain occurs in his testicles, and the separations of those are on the matter within the body up to the testes, and that matter is pus with great pus, and he does not have an external cause.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And then he extended the time to that person because of the mistake of the doctors up to the moment when the pus became more serious, and it discharged its filthy matter, and his cure was postponed until the legs were swollen, and many holes were made in them which all bled and there was moisture from the body.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And then many doctors treated him for two years, but he did not improve in that place, because I was called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And I saw the swelling of his legs and the flow of matter from those holes for a great length; and the man's body was completely swollen, and the color of it was yellowish.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then I put my hand into one of those holes and touched the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	Then I looked closely at all the holes, and I found that they came from all parts of the back.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then I hid myself and cut into one of those holes where I found a piece of bone broken, and I removed that corruption, and it was already dry and corrupted and discolored; and another part of the back had been broken in which a piece had penetrated into the pelvis.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then I cleaned that water that I had discovered and prepared the bone that had been discovered.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	I recognized that it was not in the bone but that corruption which I had cut off and cleaned, and I had already removed it.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	Then I paused the restoration of the water with solidifying medicine for a long time, and it did not become hardened.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	Then I went back and discovered the bone again after the first discovery, and I continued to remove corruption from it.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	I cleaned that water which appeared after that corruption, and then I made a hole to heal it and restore it, but it was not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then I discovered another space below it and did not stop cutting the small bone little by little and piercing the restoration of it, but it was not restored until I cut about a palm of it, and I extracted its marrow, and then I healed it with medicines, and it became hardened a little and was healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And there is no need for an operation on him and cutting his body except by the disposition of his freeness and his lack of tolerance and fear of death, because it occurs to him at all times due to excessive vomiting that causes fainting.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	So he was healed entirely, and there is nothing in the place of hard bone; and his virtue returned to him; and he did not change his behavior, nor did it cause any discomfort while walking or any other cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	But if it is an eminent bone in the place of the body that has been broken already, then you should know that you cut that second way: and that you take a ligament and strengthen it at the end of that eminent bone, and direct someone to extend that ligament; and pause that ligament with wool yarn that is fine from the first ligament; and then bring that ligament over the flesh that is next to the bone, and extend the end of it so that you can pull on the flesh of those parts, and you will discover the flesh over that place where you want to cut it so that the saw does not touch the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And he pauses firmly or table-like on the end of the bone, for when you make water it is not prohibited to cut the corrupted flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And you should know that the sawing is on the corrupted place little by little, because if it is in the concavity of the bone and does not appear in its appearance to the sense, and forces the other lock.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is corrupted and not eminent, then you should know that one end continues to the other, and corruption is in its place or in another part; then you discover all the flesh; and then you pause firmly or table-like on it, and then you saw at the end of that first part where the corruption is until it continues with the locking of the other part.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And let the sawing be in accordance with the place of corruption a little, as I have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is in the joint, then you should know to cut that corrupted joint, and then saw the bone where it continues with the other part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in reason but in another cause.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the pectus of the chest or the neck, it is difficult; but you should know that if you ask about the corruption and how it appears to you, and you cut it, and then you form it as best as you can, and then correct it for you, when it does not cause any discomfort to the veins or nerves.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And you should know that the incisions and sawing of these bones depend on their places, and their preparation, and the thickness of them, and their subtlety and size and smallness, and their hardness and their rarity; so that you prepare every type of operation with suitable instruments for that operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And you should know that this operation requires specific instruments of which you are ignorant; and if you have long study and understanding of the methods of this art, and witnesses of its failures, for then you will be familiar with them, all of which is required to do this operation.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And I'll tell you at the end of this chapter the number of instruments that will be simple for you to use in your prohibition, which you will experience on other things.
Forma de serra:	Form of cutting:
Forma de autra serra:	Other form of sawing:
Forma de autra serra:	Other form of sawing:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Other large form of sawing:
Forma de ray:	Form of chiseling:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	The point of this chisel should be according to the shape of a star's claw head, and the points of it should be according to the shape of the points on an astragalus.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And you should only use them when the heads of the joints are corroded or the large mouth is wide open.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Form of a larger razor of the others:
Forma de razori menor:	Form of a smaller razor:
Forma de razori lat:	Form of a wider razor:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Other form of sawing that is properly done: Let the blade be sharp and the edge of it made of iron, and the member of it a small dagger done properly.
Forma de lu:	Form of it:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Form of razor that has a concave shape:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Other subtle form of razor:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Form of other razor with extreme curved end:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Form of small razor resembling a tentacle:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Form of incisors in which the bones are incised:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Other lesser form of incising:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Form of another incising that resembles a chisel, and the end of it is curved like a saw, and is displayed in the place of bones:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Form of sawing that corresponds to the shape of those that penetrate the bones:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And the end of it is triangular with an acute point.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	It is made of Indian steel, and its appearance is similar to that of razors, incisors, and saws.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	Of the extreme incising and the locking of the bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The extremities may be preserved or not, depending on the inherent cause or the extrinsic cause; if you treat that corruption with medicines and cure does not come about, or sometimes the corruption comes about without striking any cause, then incise that member within where the corruption occurs, so that the bad thing is removed by water from death or maliciousness which is a greater dispelling of the member.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the sign of that person is that the member becomes black within where it has burned, or it is returned to its original state within that the corruption has not reached, or it has struck all the body; and therefore cauterize that member.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And in appearance, if the corruption is caused by some poisonous cause from a scorpion of the sea or a snake or a weasel, and similar.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or the percussion is in that end, then you incise that part and do not give space for the corruption to enter the whole body.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And if you hit that part, then you incise it from the edge of the fire, and do not give space for the corruption to enter where it reaches the fire of the arm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if that part is hit, then you incise the arm within where it joins in the joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if that corruption and again goes around the joint, then death occurs for the patient; and in this case, a quantity of virtue is administered.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And in appearance, if corruption appears on that foot instead of the other foot, then you incise it within one of the feet.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if it takes hold of the slope of the foot, then you incise all the foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	Or if it strikes the groin within, then you incise the groin where it joins.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if corruption has already struck the groin, then let there be only dismissal, and let the patient die.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	And the way of incising the member or sawing it is that you tighten the joint at the end where you want to incise, and strengthen another joint over the spot; and extend the ministry of a joint to the ends, and extend the other joint to them; and you separate the meat which is between two joints apart, and so it is incised or sawed.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	It is better to pause the drape of meat from all parts in order that it does not touch the spot, and let the patient suffer a proper injury and an aposteme cauterize.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	Or if you hit flux of blood when working, then you cauterize the spot properly, or sprinkle some powder on it to tighten it; and return to your medication as soon as possible.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then bind the infected member with a strong joint, and cure that within which is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And I recommend to you that you take care of a man in his own foot, this mety who has accidentally struck it with fire that was assembled by fire.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that corruption first occurred in that foot's joint which extends to the whole foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that man prepared himself for this other man who brought the cure to that member with the speed of his own life which was taking him from pain and from the heat of his own fire, and he incised that foot within the joint, and fire healed it.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	A long time ago, that corruption occurred in that man's foot while walking.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then I went to him, and so I pierced that superfluity with water that was poured on his body from the medicine, in order to change the condition of his body; and that superfluity did not respond and began to go away from that foot where it started, and it went away from the whole body.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And he appealed to me to incise his body, and I did not wish to make water flow on that superfluity, and instead I wanted to incise his body properly from death, for the virtue of that patient was over death.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And then he left me, and he returned to his own land and came to me who prepared that man's body, and I incised all of it, and it was healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I have not added to this narrative but that it may be an assistant over this patient, and that it may be understood in accordance with the meaning of which it is understood, and according to which it should be turned.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	Of the quality of cure and the nature of clysters with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When the apoplexy occurs in some of the flesh and the space of the apoplexy is prolonged within where it connects to a bone, then it is cut and pierced, and it is removed from there, leaving that place as if it were a wound, and the skin that opens it is stretched slightly, and does not return to its original state; it is called a sinus, and it is not named a fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	But if the space is prolonged where the corruption goes up to some member, then it is called a fistula and not zooken.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And the cure for that is to incise that sinus completely as it is rolled up, and more so when it is stretched and made thin with cloth, and you ensure that it does not stick to the spot by its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	But if you hope that the sinus will adhere and that that corruption has not achieved its goal by means of successive infection, and in the sinus there is pus on the face, then you treat that with medicines.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And that is what you consider when it comes to the sinus, and if it is large, and the arm with which you can smell its odor, then you cauterize it with an Egyptian medicine consisting of olive oil and honey, and let them be adjusted in a vessel, and let them rest on fire so that the medicine boils and reaches the top part of the arm.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And now you take from him the water that is necessary and dissolve it with honey; and you clisterize him in this way: put a poultice on the wound, and leave the medicine there for two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And now remove that with a poultice; and make water for so many days until the sinus is cleansed and the shame restored.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And some are clisterized with ash water, when you cannot take this medicine: and because you take the ash from the vine, and put it on the water; and now stir it up, and clisterize him in this way, that you swear that the sinus will remain closed.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the patient does not tolerate Egyptian medicine or ash water, then clisterize him with honey and water, and mix it with three parts of zink; and clisterize him with honey and zink mixed: for the quality of honey is to cleanse and wash away; and wine binds the sinus, and more so when there is an excess of dryness and rigor.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you have made water a few times and are certain that the sinus is now opened, then clisterize him with water in which meat has been soaked.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And because you take a poultice of daphnic water and dissolve it with rosin oil and wine; or because you clisterize him with some medicines that I have already described in the treatise on poultices.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the orifices of the sinus are small, so that the catheter of the clisteric does not reach them, then you make them larger little by little, and put a few folded poultices of Egyptian ointment or of basil ointment on them to make them larger.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And if the orifices are wide, then you add some sutures to the lips, and leave the quantity in which the catheter is added by means of an incision.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the orifices from which blood flows are elevated above the edge of the sinus, then you cut them with a sharp knife in order that the blood may flow inside and not outside, for when the arm is constricted at the edge of the sinus, the flesh will be damaged where it has grown.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if you cannot cut the sinus according to the shape of the bone, as it is possible to do, then you make an incision in the member so that blood may flow there, so that it does not remain constricted and cause pain; and do this in such a way as not to injure anything or to keep back any cause of pain.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	Take some consolatory medicines that are put on the sinus with a poultice, and extend them with water according to what you wish: they should be put on a cloth.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And the cloth should be of such a size that it covers all the sinus; and now cut with a pair of scissors on one side of the sinus orifice, a cut as wide as possible without injuring anything; and now extend over another cloth of the poultices of lion's dung according to the quantity of the cut, and place it there by means of a long position far from the orifice of the sinus so that the blood may flow away from the arm and not keep the cloth large; but only for a few days.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	And place there that which is over the sinus orifice; which you open in all hours, so that the blood does not keep flowing from it, and cause pain.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And so that you know if the blood that flows from the arm is little or much, or whether it is good or bad.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And now consider the position of that sinus; if the patient feels pain there or not, and whether it is with a swelling.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And if the medicine you have prolonged in this way and see that the matter is adhering to the sinus orifice, then dislodge it on the third day; and when you remove the poultice, then change the cloth and renew the ointment.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	But if from the sinus comes a subtle virus, then do not despair of the adhesion of the poultice, for the healing takes possession, because in some people it takes a long time for the flesh to heal and not in others; but with those men who have a quick healing of the flesh.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if the sinus has been painful for more than three days, then you will know that it does not adhere; and if the adhesion of the sinus is caused by prolonged medicine, then adjust in drying the medicines; and if the medicines are wet in their substance or power, then make them dry with daphnic poultice when they are being adjusted; and if there is an excess of dryness and rigor.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the last to be used, is that you take a poultice of daphnic water and dissolve it in rosin oil, and put it on the wound, and use it with that.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And it already seems as if there is no more pain, with daphnic poultice, honey when it is thick, and use it; or take myrrh and aloes and grind them together, and mix them with honey when they are hot, and put some on the wound, and use it with that.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And some apply the long herbal solution and cut up lilies of the sky (and there are lilies of the sky) and flour from erica and centaurea, and use them as they are or prepare them, grind them together and pass them through a sieve and sift them over the honey that I have mentioned; and use it.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the sinus is prolonged and not cured by this treatment, then you will know that corruption is in its beginning; and now do an incision with a knife, as high as it can be, so that the blood may flow away from the sine.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	Of treatment of wounds with applied ointments and scraped nails and cutting fingers off and sectioning them.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Panarici is a swelling that does not allow the nail of the toe of the hand or foot to leave it, and it hurts in the others; and if it is prolonged with its treatment, then the prognosis is bad, or it is an ulcerous swelling, or it is corrupted, and it puts out a finger, and greatly hurts; and so it corrupts all of that, and greatly disfigures it.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And therefore, when you have the water that I have mentioned in the division and do not use your treatment, then cut off all the excess of the nail, and cauterize the wound with fire; for cauterization is helpful in this case.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if the bone is healthy and the nail is good, and the additions of the nail have already broken into the flesh inside, and it begins to put out a pungent smell and to burn it, then stop pricking that part of the flesh with a sharp object, and push that flesh away from there; and place on it that which I have mentioned to cure it; and use it.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	And if the corruption has already entered into the bone, then cut out that bone and push it away from there; for no time is ever cured when it has become corrupted.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the corruption and corruption enter into a finger, then you cut it with a knife according to what is most convenient for the memory of that part, and then cure it; and use it.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	If in the finger there is a puncture or an attrition, and it hurts severely, then you should have just begun to inject the patient with water, and dry the finger with a spatum from above in a transverse cut across the joint; and be careful that the cut does not penetrate the flesh which is under the joint, for you would make the patient experience severe pain, and cause unnecessary birth of flesh in that place; and then cure that place with water which will relieve the pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	May it be adjusted well, which is born in the flesh of some men, very lean is that flesh all over, and very lean so in the bones, or very lean is in the finger.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And some of them are born in the root of the joint, or the birth is in some nuts of those said.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	May it not be born in some nuts of the aforesaid, and may that which is born in the joints very lean be well;
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And of those which are born fatty, the cut is light, and it is because you pierce that part with a sharp knife.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	May it be difficult to cure him who is born in the root of the joint; and therefore be careful not to cut that part.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	May it be born in some nuts of those said, then you should cut the flesh of him at the beginning with a round incision into the bone, and immediately close it with one of those scissors; and then cure that part which is cut.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	May the cure which happens to those said between them in the shape of a ring or by birth of man who is born within it, or by solidification of plague or by burning from fire, or by similar means, then you should dry that solidification within so that those said return to their natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And then place between them a thin plate of lead within so that it is not solidified too much, and separate them or place a thin plate between them according to how it is consolidated.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And if in some of those said there is solidification on the palm, then you should dry that solidification according to how it is prepared, and join it to the shape of the member.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	Of incisions of two kinds, then are varicose veins.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	And those are varicose veins, and those veins are thick and full of superfluous melancholy fluid which comes from the legs of the body, and more so in the legs of travelers, laborers, and porters.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Then you should administer a strong purge of black cholera from time to time by strong vomiting, and then draw blood from the patient's basilic vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	May the cure be by two methods: one is that it is cut and sucked out that black blood, and another method is that the vein is raised and all of it is drawn out.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The cutting of him is according to this method: Dip the leg into warm water from the beginning so that the black blood is dissolved, which comes from the leg's vein, and then raise the leg high from the end opposite to where it comes out of the vein, using a cloth, and then cut the vein at one point, or two, or three according to a broad incision, and then lift up that black blood with the foot's end opposite to where it comes out of the vein, and then towards the lower part, so that the quantity which you want is exhausted, and which can tolerate the virtue of the patient.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And then bind it up, and order him to abstain from the foods which engender black cholera.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	Repeat the cure by infusion when the veins are filled with water and noticed by the patient.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	May the elevation be according to this method: You who have cut the patient' leg, if there are knots in it, and then dip it into warm water so that it swells up and its veins are swollen, or exercise it hard by strong exercise, if bath is not present, so that the member is scraped.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And then cut off the codena in the right of the vein by incision in the long or in the back of it, or in the lower part of it, or cut off the top part of it according to which you can reach the vein.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And then open the codena with a sharp knife and extract the vein from all parts until it appears at the surface, and that is the appearance of it which sometimes changes to blackness.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And then you shall see that white cord which comes from the codena.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And then you should put down that part where it is lifted up and taken out of the codena, and suspend it by an ounce or two of lion's milk.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	And then cut another incision near that one according to three lines, and then extract the codena from the beginning of the vein until it appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	And then raise that one and cut it at the back of the last part according to which you can reach the vein, and then extract that one and raise it until it is exhausted by the second incision, and then extract that one from the first incision.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And then bring water from that part which is higher or lower than all the incisions, so that it is exhausted by all of them; and then cut that one.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if you do not obey me to extract and raise it, then put in a sharp needle double and fasten that one, or turn it towards the end of the vein, and roll it up with your hand so that it is rolled all over;
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And be careful that it is not cut; for if it is cut, it will be difficult to raise that leg, and it may come about the patient' injury by that wound.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when all of it has been brought out, then place that part where the plague is covered in water and oil which is red and not red, and cure that part which is to be cured.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the vitus has not been contracted to some part of it and is not according to what we said, then you should make a cut over that part where the tortuosity is and at the places where that part is wrapped up, and immediately suspend that one by a sharp knife within so that you can raise that part entirely.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And be careful that your incision should not touch the vein or that part which is to be cured, for you cannot easily raise that leg; and serve your prudence in that one.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	Shape of the incision which is dried up by the vitus:
Forma de unci orp:	Shape of the white cord:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not sharp by that one like a hook or the extreme part so that it does not touch the vein; and its flexibility is great like lion's milk, for if it were subtle, you should cut the vein with its subtility; be careful about that extra-subtility when you have said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	Of extraction of the vein of the leg.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is generated in the legs in the lower parts as when it is born in the Arabic lands and in the dry and arid lands of little tenderness and where there is no grass or shade.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And very lean is generated in other parts of the body, except for the legs.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And the generation of that leg is from decay which remains between the codena and flesh, and from venom which enters into the body from snakes, worms, and scorpions, and from insects which are generated between the codena and meat.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	And the sign of the coming of that leg is a violent inflammation of the vein; and then the part is irritated; and then the vein begins to flow from that place which seems like plant roots.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And then if he has opened the end of him, it is necessary that you wrap a piece of lead over that part from which comes out his pee, and let it hang from his back.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And so often as you see any cause to move him away from the outside, wrap this around him in lead and put it on him.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if it is prolonged, then you cut a hole in him and wrap the lead around it; and do not cut that which is outside until it is inside, because if you cut that, it will contract and get into the flesh, causing a bad blister and ulcer in the place and disease.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	So that it is pulled out little by little, until it is completely taken out, so that nothing is left behind in his body and there is no reason for it to be moved from within his body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And of this vein I have drawn in some men who are ten hands long and more, and now it has come to me that one of them is twenty-two palms long.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is cut at the hour of his medication, then you push a sharp object into his stomach and pierce it from one side to the other, so that all the putrid matter is evacuated from it, and administer the putrefaction of the place for some days with medicines; and then cure it with blistering.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein sometimes gives a ramp, and more often when it appears at the junction of the foot or in the foot, and then comes out through several orifices, and is drawn from each orifice.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And so I have said about this that it is cured with what we have said in the division and at the price that is above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	Of the section on worms born under the skin and called bovine disease.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This disease is called in some countries the bovine disease because it sometimes appears in cattle and is a little worm that is born between the skin and flesh, which goes into all the body and falls out, and is seen on the surface of the skin as blisters break out, which then open and discharge pus.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And its generation is by the putrefaction of some fluids in this way that worms and snakes and earthworms and ascarians are born in the stomach.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is feared because when it goes into the body and rises to the head, and comes out through the mouth, then it breaks open the mouth and destroys the teeth, and there are also seen motes.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And so when you want to cure him and remove him, do not do it unless you see his movement and appearance, and then hold him tightly with a strong grip and press hard on him, and then dry him up and take him out.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is pressing into the flesh and you do not see it, then stop cauterizing over the place where it is hidden, and the most common cause is the corruption of him which we have said above.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	But if you see him come out to the head near the mouth, then hold him tightly with a strong grip and dry him up, and take him out; and let the patient use medication that removes the bad fluids, and be careful not to eat anything that causes corruption.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	Of the section on disease of cattle.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This disease is called in our country Nafir, and it is a painful illness that appears in some members, and then is exchanged from one member to another.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And I have already seen that second thing which I recommend to you.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	And she was called to a village as a female doctor and saw her arm swollen and discovered a small swelling in the vein of the arm, and it kept getting worse for an hour, and then it seemed to her that it was alive and moving from one place to another, like liquid silver moving.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	Then he lay down in the pain of that place and stayed there for an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And then it moved into the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And then I returned to him that I would turn over him all at once, because I had seen the exchange of him from one member to another, and was astonished by his movement and speed.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I have already seen that second thing which I recommend to you. However, I have not seen such movement and exchange of members before.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	I did not see this in the woman's arms.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And you did not think it was because of him, but because of the woman, for she is of an old age where the body becomes stiff and the veins are covered up, and in this way her movement appears to the sense as a wind moves.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that this appearance of movement does not occur in those who are delighted and have a soft body with veins that are easily opened.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And if you want to cure him and the patient feels pain, then do not appear to him as I have said above, then hold him tightly and dry him up on him until the movement is stopped, and cauterize the place.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	But if you do not see the woman's arms, then you cure him with the extraction of the body and with water that drives away movement, and with pills made of fermented wine and those that resemble garlic.
De extraccio de sagetas.	Of the extraction of arrows.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrows are different according to their points, and they are small, concave, solid, with three sides, tongue-shaped, and flat.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And that which is according to the members and places where they are according to two ways: because those members or main ones are concave, such as the neck, heart, chest, lungs, and lungs, and their resembling them; and when you avoid extraction of that arrow in those where death seizes that member in the greatest dispositions, and when you do not appear those bad signs, and that arrow is not hidden in the depth of the member, then extract it and cure plague.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And of the neck is when the arrow enters the bone, and it goes through the skull, because it happens with violent speed, and dizziness, and pain in the mouth, and spasms, and confusion of thought, and vomiting of cholera, and strong pain is broken off the word, and it is destroyed by the place of the plague, which has a white appearance like pus, and it appears to be coming out of the flesh.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And so if you see those signs, then you abstain from curing and extracting the arrow, unless it is taken out.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	But the arrow that enters into the chest is close to the left arm, and you feel that it has stuck in a hard place, and there is no sign of movement; and the movement of the arrow is like the movement of the pulse, and it comes out with the black plague, and it freezes the extremities, and it causes a ringing sound, and fainting; and so if you know that death is coming soon.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And of the signs when the arrow has struck the lungs is when there is a frothy appearance of the plague, and the vessels that are close to the neck are blistered, and the color of the patient changes, and he breathes heavily and asks for air.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the arrow is shot in the veil that is on the foot, and the pain then appears near the small ribs, and it causes great intense pain and sighing, and does not calm down all the muscles of the limbs.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if the arrow is shot in the stomach, then suddenly the sick person vomits some uneaten food.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if the arrow is shot in the belly and gets stuck, there is a chance of breaking the membrane or intestine, or the hernia that it tears, and there is no hope for the extraction of the arrow.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the arrow is shot in the bladder and it comes out with urine, and causes some pain outside, and the intense pain on the patient's thigh, then know that it is fatal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	May the other members also be affected as it is with the face, neck, jaw, shoulders, back, and chest - along with their respective limbs - are saved according to the greatest dispositions when the arrow does not hit a vein or artery, nor is it a poisonous arrow.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I recommend to you that I have seen the effect of these arrows, so that you understand by this for what purpose they are made.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The cause is this, for in a man an arrow is shot in the lacrimal of his eye at the root of his nose, and I extracted it from him from the other side, I cut off his ears, and it was healed, and nothing happened to his eye.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And I extracted another arrow from a Jew who shot it in his eye, cutting off his eyebrows, and the arrow was hidden, and only a small tip remained attached to his lid, it was a sharp arrow of the Turks, with a ferret point - not having ears.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And after that, the Jew did not have any accidents in his eye.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And I extracted another arrow from a Christian who fell on his jaw- it was an Arabic arrow, and that is the one to which there are no ears; and then I cut off part of that arrow between two guides, and it had already sunk into his jaw; and then I carefully extracted that arrow, and healed the Christian.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And I extracted another arrow from a man who fell in his stomach, and I thought he would die of that arrow; and then, since it had been thirty days and it did not change its position or cause any other symptoms, I cut off the arrow and removed it, and he was healed, and nothing bad happened to him.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And I saw a man in whom an arrow had lodged in his chest, and the plague was established on him, and since it had been seven years, he pulled out the arrow from the bottom of the rib cage.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And I saw a woman to whom an arrow had lodged in her stomach, and the plague was established inside her, and it did not change its position or cause any harm to her natural abilities; the woman did not suffer any harm.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And I saw another man to whom an arrow had lodged in his face, and the plague was established and split the arrow, not causing any harm or pain, but it looked similar to these.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And I extracted the arrow from the lord of the king who fell in his left nostril, and it had already fallen on the right side a little, and the entire arrow was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And I was called to heal him after three days of his injury.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then I removed the arrow with a subtle touch; and then I felt that there was no sensation  - but at the right ear, then I heard that there was a sense of pressure from the end of the arrow.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And I applied the ointment to the place where it was stuck  - an antidote and digestive, telling me that the place would turn white so that I could see the spot of the arrow, to clean it out.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And nothing bad happened in that place where the arrow had stuck; and I continued to apply the ointment to it for several days, and the plague was established in the meantime; and on the fifth day he felt a sensation in his nose, as if the arrow were coming out, and it did come out at night while sleeping, and I heard that.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then I applied to the plague a strong corrosive medicine for several days, until the third day, and then I tasted it, and I removed the tip of the arrow with my fingers, which was very sharp.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And then I adjusted the treatment of the plague with that medicine for several days, until it appeared to me visibly the tip of the arrow, and then I left it there for a while, and later on, over time, for four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And then the plague became worse and I had to enter it with scissors, and then I cut off that part of the arrow, as it was coming out in pieces, and then I extracted it; and then the plague stopped.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And a few doctors said that the cartilage of the nose was not restored, and I restored it, and the plague was established, and healed completely; and he did not suffer any harm in him because of it.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I recommend to you the quality of extracting some arrows from some animals, so that you understand this for what purpose they are made; because the methods and definitions of those things are not understood by me in writing or by speech.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the craftsmen know a little about it by practice, and on what is present understand what is absent; and they have new operations and new instruments for discovering the foreign causes of things when they happen.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And therefore I say that arrows are not discharged from the limbs in which they are stuck, but only in two ways: either by attraction of the part where they are stuck; or by the opposite of the other way.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is discharged by the place of departure is attracted, or it proceeds from a meat-like place and is shot and discharged outside.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if you do not obey the hour in which it is shot, then know that you will have to wait for a few days until you find the meat that is around it, and that it is neither attracted nor discharged.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	And seemingly if it is stuck in bone and you do not obey the hour in which it is shot, then leave that for a few days and return to it with attraction and moisture every day, and then it will be discharged.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if you do not obey the hour in which it is shot, then know that you will have to wait for a few days before you cut through the entire bone with a sharp tool, and then extract it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the arrow is stuck in the bone of the head and it has already reached one of the vessels of the brain, and appears in the symptoms that I have described, then abstain from extracting the arrow, and leave it there until after a few days; because if the arrow reaches the brain, then death is prolonged.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrow is not stuck in any bone, but only in the heart, and it does not reach the brain, then leave it there for a few days, and know that you will have to wait for the attraction of the arrow, and for your own attraction.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	Now if it is mot fit and you don't obey to extract it, then administer taravels on the circuit of the arrow therefore as we have described, and then cure the place until it is healed.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	Now if the arrow has already entered the body and it is stuck in there because of its own weight, then you should ask the patient to pull the arrow out himself if he feels it. If he doesn't feel anything, then shoot the arrow out with a special instrument that suits the draw of the arrow.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you can' t reach it because of the constriction of the flesh and the length of the pronation, and there are no bones or nerves or veins, then you should go deeper into the wound so that it is expanded and the arrow can be extracted.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if the arrow has gone into the ear, which is held in place by all the flesh around it, then you should free the meat that it is stuck in from all sides; and work on it from inside the cavity of the ear, since it is difficult to reach, until it comes out.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in any place where it is, then use all your might with forceps at every turn until it makes the patient feel pain; and be very careful that the arrow doesn' t break and that its extraction is difficult for you.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you can' t reach the arrow with your own hand, then leave it for a few days until the wounds heal; and then try again to extract it.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	Now if you have a fever that causes a cold sweat, then administer the medicine we talked about in the first chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And preserve your patience in case you need to extract the arrow from any blood vessel, nerve, or string; and administer medicine in all possible ways for this purpose - with ease, calmness, patience, and caution.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And therefore turn the arrow around so that the patient faces upwards, as it is more pleasant to extract the arrow in this way.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	Now if you can' t do it with your own hand, then administer medicine that allows for it with figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	Now if the arrows go out in the opposite direction to that of their normal movement, or if they stick out a little from the body on one side, then cut off the tip of the arrow with scissors; and then fire the arrow, as it is taken out easily.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	Now if it is stuck in the bone, then twist your hand according to the direction in which the arrow goes into the bone; and then extract it.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	And if not, leave it for a few days, and then try again.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	Now if the tip of the arrow is in there, then push it out with your hand.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	Now if the tip is stuck, and you want to administer an impact, then push it in with your hand - if it's deaf - a special instrument so that it enters between the hollow of the arrow and pushes it out; and then push the arrow out with your hand.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	Now if the arrow is hollow, then push it in with a strong instrument; as the arrow itself pushes against the area inside the body.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the arrow is poisoned, then cover all the flesh with medicine where it has entered; and then cure that area with medicine.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the arrow goes into the foot, or the belly, or the bladder, or the ribs, and it is close to a nerve, then cut off the tip of the arrow with your finger; and be careful not to cut any blood vessels or nerves, and then fire the arrow. And if you feel pain, then stop cutting; and cure that area until it heals.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	The shape of the forceps for throwing arrows:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	They have sharp points like the beaks of birds, made with scissors when they grab the arrow, so that it doesn' t slip away.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And of those special shapes are made: large, small, and medium ones; according to the size of the arrow and the width of the wound, and the constriction of the flesh around it.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	The shape of an impaling instrument with this curved end, which allows for the arrow to be extracted from within it, and a loud noise when it strikes:
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	The shape of a silent impaler at the end:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	like a ray, so that it extracts the arrow from within the arrow and impales it on the object.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	From bloodletting by veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so .xxx., de las quals so en le cap .xvi., so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins from which blood is drawn for bloodletting are those that: 1), 2) and 3). are found in the head. are found in the head, and are known as: 1) the pulsatile veins that run through the ears, 2) the two veins that run along the temples, 3) the two tears that come from the eyes, 4) the vein that runs along the nose, 5) the two veins at the base of the throat, 6) the vein in the middle of the forehead, and 7) the two veins on the lips. These are known as the alchemical veins.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so .v.; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	Now the veins that are bloodletting from the arms are: 1), 2), 3), and 4). Because one of those veins is a cephalic vein, and it should be drawn from the head; and people call it "the vein of the head", and it is a venose vein, and another ram of the cephalic vein; and this ram is called "citillar", and people call that vein "the vein of the belly"; and the veins that run down the arms, and are paused over the fire, and which are being bled from - those are the ones that are named "venous veins", and those two veins run under the ears; and one of them is called "the little vein", and it runs between the cephalic and temporal veins; and another one of them runs along with the jaw; and it is known as "the vein of the neck".
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And in the foot and leg there are three veins: 1) one of those is called  "the vein that runs under the heel of the wild head", and it runs on the outside of the leg; 2) another one is called  "the sophena", and its location is below the thigh's skin; 3) and the sciatic vein, and its location is between the thigh's muscles; and there are other veins that resemble those.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The healing of the veins that run through the ears is done by small, migrating, sanguineous, and scalded wounds on the head of old people with bad hair.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of the bloodletting is according to how it is done: if the head of the patient is shaved and the bloodletting area is well rubbed; then apply the bloodletting instrument in two places that are deeply buried on the back of the head, near the base of the skull; and then tie the blood vessels with a knot, until they stop bleeding; and then test the pulse of those veins with your finger, and if you feel it, then stop tying.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Then take the blade of a scythe, and it is this one that is sharp; and then push it into the vein from below, until the blood starts flowing out; and then apply force to that one with your hand until it reaches the bone.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And then lift up your hand towards the vein and cavity above the hole, and cut the vein with a sharp instrument.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And be the length of the incision the quantity of two fingers' breadth or more thereof; and make it as wide as you will.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then put on your gloves and cut there that which is to be removed.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And already at the beginning of this book has been described the incision of those and their cauterization.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	More than two veins, which are at the base of the legs, give life to the flux of blood from the foot; they are the ancient and evil disease of the eyes, frequent headaches, and acute effusions that spread in the limbs.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of the bloodletting depends on what you have decided: If the patient's leg hurts when it is pressed, and this pain is felt by touch, then the pulse should be tested for weakness; and afterwards, you will know whether to try or not.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	Then raise the vessel at its roots from under the skin with your thumb; insert the bloodletting needle below, and lift up the vein in its place; cut it there according to what you have determined, and then let it flow from the cut.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then cut the skin of the patient' leg, and leave it for an hour; then place your hand on the vein, and also your gloves, and tighten there with a firm grip, leaving it for a little while; then let go, and make the incision.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	Then the memory of them is already presented, as well as their incision, and the cauterization at the beginning of this book.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And the healing power of bloodletting from the forehead vein is for the ancient diseases of the face, as well as for headaches, and also for bad smells from ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of the bloodletting depends on what you have decided; and if the patient' leg hurts when it is pressed, then bind it with a cloth so that the vein appears; and then put the instrument into it, which is called a scissor, and this is its form.
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then stop the piercing that is on the top of the scissor over that vein and hit it with a hammer or another cause in the same way as this, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you want; then cut through the skin of the patient' leg, and tighten there with a grip; then let go, and make an incision.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	And some people say that bloodletting is a good thing, but it does not follow that the bloodletting should be of an extreme nature as with the others; for the bone is strong and firm, and would easily break if bloodletting were done from it when it is thin.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	It may be done with two veins that are at the base of the eyelids, in order to relieve the pain of the eye; and this is good for headaches and eyesores.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	And the quality of bloodletting is to tighten the leg with a cloth; and then let him be standing on the top of it.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And let blood be drawn according to the transverse direction at a little length, because in that place there is no flesh; and if the bloodletting is done finely, then the end of it will easily break.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Then let the blood flow as much as you need; and place your hand on those areas, and tighten there with a firm grip, and then cut them off.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	And the bloodletting from the nose vein is for a severe fever and for a violent headache; and also for ancient diseases of the face, and emigrant diseases, and most importantly when they are old.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of bloodletting from the nose is to tighten the leg with a cloth; and then place the patient' left hand on it; and take up the needle with care in your right hand, and make a fine incision at a little length because the vein does not appear here, and because the blood starts to flow soon.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	And at the end of your work, you will do small bloodletting little by little, and let the blood flow according to what is necessary; and then place a cloth on it, for that wound heals quickly.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	It may be done with the two bloodletting instruments of constriction, from which it begins to be harmful; and this is good for starting leprosy, as well as for bad diseases and foul smells.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And the quality of bloodletting from those is to tighten each one by the leg with a thread; and place the patient on a table, and let the instrument be under his head; and let him lie on his back.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	Then let blood be drawn with a long, large needle little by little; then draw out the blood according to the time or water, as much as you need; and then do the same for the other vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	Then cut off the thread and tighten the two veins with a moderate grip because the patient might die if they choke; and leave them inside, for the plague is healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	And the healing power of bloodletting from the veins is to relieve a small blister and pus on the mouth, corruption of the gums, and bad ulcers and cracks; and also to remove bad ulcers that are in the nose and around it.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	And the quality of bloodletting from those is that you cut the skin in front of your face, and tighten it with a cloth, and separate the lips of him; and look at the two veins which are on the right side of the lip, and the other which is on the left; and recognize each one according to its blackness, and this one is more because the two blood vessels are small black ones; then cut one with a sharp blade.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	Then if you have any doubt, leave it; and if you do not know which one is which, then go to the incision of the larger one, and of the manifestation of pus from them.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	Then make the incision of the two veins that are on the lips.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	And always cut deeper than you need to; and always go deep with the incision of those two veins.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	And from the two veins that are on the tongue, half an inch of bloodletting is enough for headaches, and for a pre-fever that is in the throat, and for ancient diseases of the mouth.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And the quality of bloodletting from those is that you follow the tongue between your hands before the sun comes out; and raise the tongue of him, and look at the two veins on either side, and their color changes to blackness.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	Then bloodlet one of them; and be careful that you do not draw the blood out of them too much, because those are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And your veins that are bloodletting in the neck are those from which blood is usually drawn in all people; and the bloodletting from them is done with two methods, or by inserting a needle with care or by cutting with a knife and applying it to the wound, if there is any, and this is its form.
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And the former one is that it is done by section, and from those special thin ones according to the width of the veins and according to their constriction.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Method for cutting the skin with a knife in a V-shape, leaving two ends.
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	And the third one is that it is done by opening the skin of the vein with care, and this is done to reveal large veins, and also those that contain thick blood; and these ones are removed in a different way than those.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	And this is the form of olive bloodletting:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And this type of bloodletting is of lesser duration and more subtle in its effect; it is suitable for bloodletting from small veins that contain mild black bile.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	May the bloodletting of the bazilian vein be of three types: it removes the black bile that is found in the head and the heart; and from this it affects the feet and the belly.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And it is appropriate for the bloodletter, when he performs this type of bloodletting, to be very careful with it; because if he misses the artery, and if by mistake he pierces into it in the process of bloodletting, he will cause a flow of blood, so that it must not be done by piercing.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the bazilian is not seen clearly, then you must stop and move to the other; or search for a hair; or bloodletting at the end of the arm, since that is obvious; and dry it with a cloth after bloodletting without water.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	May you choose the place of bloodletting on his arm, and stand before the bend of the arm that touches the place that you know about, and hold it firmly with a cloth; then cut off the arm and dry the vein for bloodletting without water as mentioned above; and be careful not to pierce into the artery by any margin.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	And when you see it with strength hold the joint, then that inflation is an inflation of the artery, and so let it go.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if the blood flows from bloodletting as a child does, and that blood is dark, then you know that it is the blood of the artery; and then place your hand on it for a long time; and then remove your hand when the blood has stopped flowing; otherwise hold the arm firmly and let it go.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And pay attention to the patient's diet, and be careful with him for a few days until he recovers.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	May the blood not stop flowing if it does flow; and if you have no medicine with water, then you pierce the artery with a sharp object, if seen; because the end of it is contracted, and the blood stops flowing; or that you take a piece of fig, and cut it into pieces, and one piece and hold it over the place of the vein's constriction against the joint, and put another on top of it within the next day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And if the blood has stopped flowing, then it is fine; and if not, then treat him with water that comes before remembering the place where the dust stops flowing due to blood flow.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And stopping the flow of blood is difficult because of the small place of the joint and the possibility of hurting the arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	May the bloodletting from the black vein be a treatment that removes the blood of the cerebral part and of the part of the body as mentioned above.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And if the bloodletter is careful in the process of bloodletting, because he has missed a nerve; and if by mistake he pierces into the place of bloodletting without water and cuts the nerve, it will cause stupor to him, and his recovery will be difficult, and if he does not recover completely, he will remain disabled. And that nerve is obvious with regard to feeling; and if it is hidden from sight in some men and is subtle, then you must stop bloodletting at the place where you have cut it while holding it firmly, and avoid hitting the nerve with your hand.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if the vein is between two nerves, then cut the vein in length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	May the bloodletting of the cephalic vein be that it removes the blood of the head and keeps away the black bile from the body.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And in this particular case, if you want to bloodlet by piercing with the olive bloodletting or the mirty bloodletting; for it is the safest of all veins because it does not contain an artery or a nerve.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	However, it is appropriate for you to choose the type of bloodletting that prevents piercing the head with a blade too much; and seek out the most sensitive place, and do not hit it with the first stroke, if not hit it with a cloth first.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	However, this severe swelling is found in some people when they are bloodletting for the first time; and it does not show itself on that person's body until the second stroke of bloodletting.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	May the quality of bloodletting be good and the accidents that happen to it are few, in which you should consider their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first of it is that you know that bloodletting should not be administered unless in the conservation of health and with the hope of preventing the coming of black bile, and that it should be done on one of those veins: cephalic, falciform, or bazilian; and that it should be performed at the beginning of spring, when there are signs of reabsorption.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And let bloodletting be done on the third day or the first after three hours have passed from the previous day.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	May bloodletting be administered if it causes convenience and necessity to the patient, or at a new time or day, in any hour and at any time.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And it is appropriate that the patient not be bloodletting until he or she has reached the age of twelve years, and that women are not bloodletting if they have passed the age of seventy, and that those who are already elderly do not bloodlet.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And if anyone wants to bloodlet in a particular way, then he must make sure that his bowels are clean before bloodletting by the clister lion; so that the veins do not take away the excess in the bloodletting of the bowels, which is useless, and does not harm the main members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And do not bloodlet on patients with nausea and thirst due to the loss of fluids; or because they are tired or have a headache, or because they are ill from too much food, or because they have not eaten for long; or because their bodies are weak or made of flesh; or because they have animals with them; or because they are sleeping.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And it is appropriate to consider the subtle humors in front of him if his blood is thick; with respect to diet and drink, and with respect to medicines if it can reach him.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And enter into a bath if any cause does not prohibit it, or exercise in any way so that the blood is subtle.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And pause bloodletting on his feet at noon, for this time is called third hour; and that is the time when you are supposed to stop bloodletting as mentioned above.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And be sure that the foot of the patient is protected on that day from all bad animal accidents, and from anger, fear, and from all physical accidents, and from unnecessary work and eating, and resembling their appearance.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And at the same time, make sure that the causes of bad smells and odours, and balms, and resembling things according to their amount are present.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And follow the bloodletter with a cloth that is softer than the cloth of the patient' body who needs to be bloodletting.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And then take his arm, and rub it with the bloodletter twice or three times; and then tighten the joint with a rope and wrap it up twice.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	E sia the stricture temperata, quar the stricture quant no es engual, o la stricture es am superfluitat, lahoras proibys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras proibys le cors del sanc eximent.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	Then apply the application, covering where it should be applied, so that the veins are swollen and pronounced in feeling.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	Then the flubotoman will cover where it should be applied with a little bit of oil that is especially made for this; and he will place his right hand on that vein from which the fluobtomation should come out, leaving the spot from which the fluobtomation comes out so that the vein is slightly released, and the percussion stops because from those veins is where it is most full of pulsations and when you stop the flubotomator from applying pressure to that vein, it should be discovered; and if it does not come out, then the flubotomator must apply more pressure, and this will cause the vein to contract.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And therefore, for all of these reasons, when the flubotoman stops and is stimulated in all of these causes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	Then stop the fluobtomation, maybe if the vein is caught in a fold, do so right away; and if not, then repeat this somewhere else, leaving that spot a little bit, or above the shinbone, if the spot is not painful.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the spot is painful or the patient has a hernia, then leave it alone for a day or two, and do not tighten the ligature because it will cause more pain, nor get into the bath.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	Then repeat the fluobtomation if the patient is in pain.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the pain is small and subtle, and you are afraid that the amount of pain will not be great enough, then repeat the fluobtomation on that spot a second time, and adjust in the opening slightly, and do so with a little pressure in front of the spot that is painful because that spot is painful in many people;
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	But if that spot has already been opened, then do not repeat on that spot again because it will not excuse your cause; and place your hand over that part of the foot where there is pain, because it eases the pain of the foot.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And it is better in this spot than oil or any other oils.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	And it seems that administered with oil in all the fluobtomations where you fleubotome the veins, because of the prohibition of the pain of the foot is caused by a constriction of the sanc, and they make water turn into soup when stopped from one of those spots on the spot, because the sanc has softened and turned around when it becomes thick.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if, in the spot where the fluobtomation is made, a large apperition occurs because it happens in folds and most often to that which does not bleed but only that fold, or to the opening of the vein a little bit, then cut, and place your hand over the spot with sponge infused with water and salt, slightly burned, and tighten it for an hour, because it dissolves.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	Then apply a little bit of water to the base of the foot from that vein with respect to it or another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if it remains in the spot for a few days some blackness or green, then do not apply this water; and if you want to, place on that spot some oil of aloes dissolved with myrrh, or oil of mint or calamus or the same smell.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	And so, in order to avoid pain, apply this water when you have applied the base of the foot from that vein with respect to it or another vein.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And therefore place your hand on that spot and if you feel pain then stop applying pressure to that spot because it will cause the blood to flow from the sanc artery.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then apply a paste with this water to tighten that spot so that it becomes hardened, and then treat the same spot with another treatment within which it is healed.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And therefore, depending on how much of this quality and what color prevails over the foot, treat each person differently.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	Because if the sanc is black, then leave it alone until it heals, and if it becomes thick, then leave it alone until it softens, and if it is hot, then leave it alone until its acute nature cools down.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And if the person is hot and full of energy and needs sanc removal in a fold, then make the fluobtomation of the vein larger and the flubotomation be longer.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And in that person who is cool, make the opposite of what you have done for this person, and if the sanc needs to be extracted in multiple folds, then make the fluobtomation in those folds long.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	And the best thing to administer in a vein fluobtomation is that it be made by cutting across, not puncturing.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	And this way of applying fluobtomation saves the flow of sanc and the incision of nerves, and it is more laudable and better than fluobtomation according to its location and length.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And to the one who is accustomed to having fainting, the fluobtomation should be applied before a little bit of water infused with wine or simple syrup slightly burned; and extract the sanc in three folds or four.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if it is a cold with fever, then dip before the fluobtomation infused with myrrh oil or with oil of honey flavored with spices such as cinnamon, ginger and cloves, or with other fragrant oils, or with perfumed oil and spices, or with scented oil.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if fainting occurs due to fluobtomation, and it is a cause of pain from the foot, then dip in cold water with a little bit of meat broth and scented oil; and use spices like cinnamon, and tie the person's shoes tightly with that.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use other causes we have mentioned in the chapter on fainting due to evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And who wants to avoid breaking the person's arms and dissolving their sanc according to the second spot, then apply the fluobtomation for a mot reason, and its virtue is that it removes the sanc little by little, so it is done according to how much of this quality there is in consecutive days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	But who wants to avoid breaking the person's arms, and removing their sanc according to a third spot, and the person' s body is strong, then apply water after seven or nine hours from the first fluobtomation.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	But who wants to get rid of the pain of the person's body at the opposite end of where it begins, then do so on the second or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	And that body in which there is a lot of pain and it is hot and acute, then remove the sanc from one spot and do so with a large amount of water, and tighten the person' s wrist over his heart, so that he does not die at the place where the fluobtomator is ignorant and careless.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And when you want to avoid breaking the arms and removing the sanc according to a second spot, and the orifices of the veins are already closed and it is difficult to extract the sanc by applying pressure with force, then press down on that spot slowly and gradually, because water is too harsh.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Then leave it alone for a little while before applying it again; or apply water to the acuteness of the fluobtomation that is coagulating the sanc in the vein orifice; or place water on it with a light pressure until the sanc comes out of its own accord.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein has burst, then let it be left alone and do not touch it until the bleeding has stopped.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if necessity forces you to urinate secondarily, and there is no excuse, then let it be urinated on that place or in another arm on another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the vein called "brae's funnel" is severed in that place where it meets the bursa or the basilica, when they are not twisted or hidden, because it is made of those.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	And the quality of the surgery is that the patient's hand goes into water until the finger becomes stiff and the vein appears clearly.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	Then it should be strengthened with a string half-way on the joint, and then it should be severed according to the small cross, not longitudinallly or according to its length.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And be wide open and your surgery should be done at the joint of the hand a little bit.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if there is a prohibition against the flow of urine, then you should immerse the hand in water until you achieve your need.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	But if you are in the summer days, then you are excused from immersing the hand in water, and the time of the month is paused when the urine flows into water in winter.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And the surgery of this vein is more safe than that of all the others, because there are no pulsatile veins or nerves.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And the surgery of the little finger on the right hand is done to the hernia in the belly.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of the surgery is that you tighten the hand with a rope or your own, because you have immersed it in water until the vein swells and is clearly visible; then you should sever it according to the cross, and if you cut it from all sides it will not be seen there.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And preserve that you do not cut off the hand after surgery, because there are nerves of those denuded muscles.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	Then return the hand to water and let the urine flow in it, because if you do not immerse that hand in water, the urine will clot at the opening of the vein, and its flow is prohibited.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And when the urine is extracted according to the quantity of need, then you should pause over the vein with oil and salt so that it does not set firmly; and apparently you should cover yourself completely.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	But if the surgery of the little finger on the left hand is done to the hernia in the belly.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	Then do the same surgery for it as you did before for the other one.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And the type of surgery for the vein is done to the hernias that are in the side of the body, as they are also hernias of the mother, and with the retention of menstruation, and with the hernias of the ribs and the breasts, and their similarity to those hernias.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	And the quality of the surgery is that the patient puts his hand in water until a vein appears clearly; and he places a strip on the joint of the hand; and the place of the vein should be clearly marked, and from there it should branch out into the face of the hand like branches.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	Then sever it widely or cut off the top part of the arm because it is better and safer to do so.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you sever the vein on the face of the hand, then you should guard yourself from the nerves that run under it on the face of the hand; and do your surgery according to the cross, as if you were cutting it.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And be careful with the surgery.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	But if there is a prohibition against the flow of urine, then you should immerse the hand in water until you achieve your need.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the person who performs the surgery makes a mistake in the first cut, then he repeats it again a little bit because the place is marked; and you do not fear that it will be bad, but you should guard yourself from the nerves there as well, for what we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	Then do the same for the other side in reverse.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And from the sciatic vein, the place there as we said is marked by removing the skin from the side of the hip.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And the surgery for the arm is done with pain when it is caused by the pain.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the quality of the surgery is that the patient goes into a bath, and he speeds up and tightens his belt on the hip from the side with four holes in a long and thin piece of rope, because it does not appear otherwise except by water.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	Then when it appears, then you should sever it with the second cut, which is on your side and according to the cross, and it is better; or you can cut it by cutting it or you can make a cut, because the place is marked.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And the vein is in a place where it is difficult to find; and if you feel the pulse of that vein, and it does not appear clearly, then sever any part of it, and that which appears on the two sides of the ear and the ring finger.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And guard yourself from the nerves, and let the urine flow in the quantity you want.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	Then remove the constriction and place it over the site of the surgery with a tight hold, because it will heal easily.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Of windiness and of the qualities of using those.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Of windiness by means of corns, or of earwax, or of veal.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	And windiness is caused by two methods: one is the cutting and extraction of urine, and the other is windiness by means of cutting.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this windiness caused by cutting is according to two methods, because it is either made by fire or cut with it.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And the places from which windiness is administered by cutting and extracting urine are twelve parts of the body, of which one is in the back of the neck, and it is the last division of the head; and the middle part of the jaw on the left side; and the lower part of the tongue next to the mouth; and two spatulas; and the sides of the cheeks; and the two chins, and they are at the end of the chin; and two fires, and they are from the two arms; and two knots; and two muscles.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	And windiness does not extract urine from the small veins in the flesh, and it does not stop the flow of urine until the whole body is emptied; but windiness is made by fire or cut with it, because it is a kind of hernias that are caused by a full bladder, and this is what makes the surgery possible, or it stops windiness by stopping the flow of urine.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	But if necessity forces windiness by a hernia or continuously, then let it be urinated in the beginning of the meal and at its end, and in the middle part of it; and in half of the time.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	And this cause is because men have urine in their bladders, and they do not feel thirsty until the whole bladder is filled with urine; and this causes windiness by fire or cutting it, because it is a kind of hernias that are caused by a full bladder, and this is what makes the surgery possible, or it stops windiness by stopping the flow of urine, and this is what causes the pain in the head and in the hair; and this is what causes darkness in the eyes and in the forehead, and sadness and confusion in the mouth; and this is what causes the blurring of the sight and the dimness of the vision, and this is what causes the person to taste urine in his mouth, or that the tongue becomes inflamed and spits out urine; and this is what causes the sleeping to multiply, and this is what causes men to sleep with a full bladder, and to be wet by it, and cold and rain, and other similar causes.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And when, by some cause of those, and particularly if it is in the third or middle part of the month, then I command that ventilation be done before two or three hours have passed.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And the benefit of ventilation of the nape is that when it supports gravity on the head and goes down into the grooves; but more so that all the body be appropriately evacuated.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	This ventilation is in the place of phlebotomy of the cephalic.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	It is not good that you use it with a grinding composition, or in which there is catarrh, because it causes great discomfort.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And by this it is not good that you use the old ones, and in the heads of which there are diseases of the gums.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	But to that which is over that is continuing above it is done oblivion; and by this you command the ventilator that he pause his hand a little away from the ventilation at the openings of the thighs, fearing the generation of oblivion.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	But ventilation of alkyhol is in the place of phlebotomy of the dark vein and of the bazillion: and by this you confer to asthma, and to the contraction of air and to the splitting of the instrument of air, and to coughing, and to filling up.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And if the ventilation of alkyhol is a little closed, for if it is paused from the sides, it generates weakness in the body and in the stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And the ventilation of alchahidhan confers to accidental pains in the head and to ophthalmia, and emigration, and pre-fever, and pains in the roots of the teeth; and it is in the place of phlebotomy of the bazillion.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And if you command the ventilator that he not press his hand for sacrifice so that he does not cut the artery and cause flux of blood.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And ventilation of the sides confers to alcohol in the mouth, and to corruption of the gums, and to appearance like those of the diseases that are in the mouth, and they stand in the place of phlebotomy of another which is in the two lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	But the ventilation that is done on the two spatulas confers to caphथन, which is done by filling up of quality.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And the ventilation of the two openings inside the mouths confers youth to phlebotomy of three veins, for it is of the bazillion, dark and cephalic; for that one attracts all those veins more than they are in the flesh, and these smaller veins from the other larger veins so that attraction comes to the three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And command the ventilator that he does not process in sacrifice, for the place is naked of flesh, and leaves him so his nerves and arteries.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And it is a ventilation that is ventilated over alshоссes and confers to hemorrhoids of the buttock and to ulcers of the sides.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And if you command the ventilator that it is a great ventilation and that it is of fire, for the place does not deserve strong section; and strong pull with subtle ventilation without sacrifice so that it comes to sacrifice.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	But small winds of the legs with great manifest pull, for they attract the blood of all the body, and confer to ancient pains of the teeth and of the mother, and of the bladder; and they provoke the menses, and confer to bothor and ademil; and they stand in the place of phlebotomy of two sophenas, and alhorcoben, and of two cavilles.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	However it disfigure all the body and causes syncope in men.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And of the alhorcoben winds, the benefit is proportionate to the benefit of two wind instruments.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	And the quality of the position of the winds is that you pause the ventilation at the beginning to see and run by water quickly, and do not prolong the position of the winds, but pause them slightly, and return them with care, and let the humors come to the place by arrival through a pipe.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And it does not cease to repeat that and continue within so that you see the place become red and swell and that the rigor of the blood appears.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	Then you sacrifice and repeat the slight water slightly, and consider in the disposition of the bodies.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	For that man who is of tender flesh of meat, you scarify one time and do not add, so that the place is not ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And command the ventilator to amplify the sacrifice and make it slightly larger, and bring the water with ease.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if the blood is thick, then you sacrifice two times, for in the first sacrifice the way of subtleization of the blood and of the water comes to it.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	But in the second for the acquired scrutiny of the extraction of the gross blood.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the blood is foul, then let there be sacrifice the third time so that it achieves the last one.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	And finally, when we want to extract the small blood slightly or slightly, it is sufficient for us one sacrifice.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we want to extract from one blood, sacrifice with a great sacrifice; and if we know that the blood is thick, then you sacrifice with an abundant sacrifice.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the term of sacrifice in which is the depth of the line only.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if that of which the line is thick, hard, dark and the pores are narrow, then let the places of the vents be wet slightly, wide resolute; if it is in summer time, then such as it is oil of aloe or oil of violet, or oil of sweet amaryllis, or oil of camomile, or of honey; and if it is in wintertime, then olive oil, or oil of lark, or oil of chamomile, or of saffron, and to those resembling.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the superfluity is thick, it frays; then let the oil be bitter, or oil of myrrh, or oil of aloes, or oil of annethum, and to their resembling.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	But if the ventilator has broad pores of tender flesh, then let it be prohibited from oil, and that in those places of the vents of its approach the ventilation be washed slightly with cold or fresh water, or with wine of Coja, or with Bordolagua water, and resembling those.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And if that of which the blood is of moist humidity, then wash your vents with honey or wine of Myrrh and sumach, and resembling those.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And if the superfluities are thick, then wash your vents with honey or wine of Antidote, or with water of Sansuc, which is marjoram, or of infusion of anethum, or of camomile, and to their resembling.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And that the ventilation be kept in advance of a bath; waiting that it is administered properly within an hour or two, and that it sleeps near the ventilation.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What is necessary so that the wind is governed by the phlebotomist before ventilation.
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	And consider in advance: then, if the ventilator or he who is to phlebotomy is coleric and blows on the head, so that it inflames it slightly, then take some cold water, or hot water, or milk of thistle, or wine of garlic, and similar;
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And pause their meals slightly, such as porridge, and meats of little taste, and prepared meals with spice, and to them resembling.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And if the combination is fresh, then take in drinking sweet syrup, or syrup of hashish with spice, and sumac, and a little wine of ale; and that it be commanded that he uses slightness of drink and eating, and pause his meals of porridge and cannabis and pisons and petits and coles.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And when, on the day of venereation and of cauterization, the drink is greater than the food.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And when given to drink some times to certain men a medicine of musk, or of alcelite before venereation or before cauterization, or close by, so that the main members are comforted and the wound is softened; and do not take that wound.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	May the cuts that are to be made be those that are stopped on the flesh, and over the wound and podagra, and over the navel, in the places of the joints, and the cutting of the navel string; for these members do not suffer from being cut.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And do not desire that from those but an attraction of pain of a member, so then stop a wound on the flesh, and over the wound and podagra, and over the navel, in the places of the joints, and cutting the navel string; and use that so that it is dissolved a sharp wind that rubs the member, and then stop over the belly and the navel, for that member becomes hardened and bleeds; because it resolves a wound.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And is stopped on the cheeks when it happens to their operation or pox, because by virtue of strong attraction light operation drives away the pox from its place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And seems when stopped on the flesh and navel a wound resolves in those that are enclosed.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	These winds are given only with juice, and some are given with fire.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And some wounds are given full of running water in the navels.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And that water is to fill the wound and be large, or is water in which herbs have been boiled; then use it.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Form of wound given with fire: its size is two fingers wide, depending on how we have formed it; and the quantity of the liquid is half a palm, and is in the center, the amount that enters into it a needle; and the hole is small according to the quantity that enters into it a needle.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	Let be made of rose water or lemon, with large edges, lion, gooseberry and raspberry; so that it does not harm the member due to its position.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And is given, at the edge of the foot, a transverse piece of rose or iron, on which is stopped a candle by fire.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And this wind is much greater than that which we have described; and the small one of those, according to the navels and the state of the one who uses it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the winds of young people are different from the winds of old people and those of big bodies.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the quality of stopping this wind with fire on the member is that he extends the ax to fire with wood properly in front of a small candle of wax, and stops it on the middle edge of the foot of the transverse piece of the axe in its middle place of the wound, so that the fire burns the whole body of the patient.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And then stop it on the member of the patient, and the thread on which we have spoken, unless when we have the wounds, do not want to stop that thread, but let the vapor run over that thread; then the wound is resolved as if dissolved.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And light the fire according to its way, and repeat it if you do not want that fire.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	May a wound that is given in the navel of the patient, with water, not having a transverse piece or thread, and is not given except it be filled with water, and is stopped on the member only.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	This is the form of it: And this wind, how much greater it is, so much better; because it receives a great quantity of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Chapter xcvii.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Sanguineous wounds are not given on motor members, but on the members on which it is not possible to place wind, because of their smallness, or because they do not have hair, or because they are in the form of a nose and look like them; or on naked member made of flesh, when the thread looks like them.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those that have been found if there are any sanguinous wounds that are in the clean waters of the world.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And let them be washed the day and night in two clean waters unless they are famished, and that does not harm any cause in the belly of those; and let the body be emptied at the beginning of cauterization and venereation, and let them be scrubbed on the member of the patient until it turns red; and then stop it.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are filled up.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if it is possible juice from the wound, it is much better.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	Then, if not, wash the place with wine and then pour on water, and squeeze it out.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the wound is prolonged in the member, close it with a piece of flesh, and if there is a residue, then stop it with a bandage; so that it does not become infected.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the wound is multiplied, then dust on it three times a day, or apply to it, and seem like them of the stinging causes, unless the wound is cleaned; or stop it with the roots of the beans, and wash it, so that the beans stick to the wound, and the wound is cleaned.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And when necessary, a repetition of the wound, as often as possible change those who suck blood.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if the sanguineous wounds are prohibited by suspension, then wash the place with fresh blood or put a needle in the places unless it stings; and then stop them, because those who feel any pain immediately stop them.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want to make them fall, dust on those a little of dried aloe, or salt, or ash, and wash it often.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Thus begins the treatment of third-degree burns: by restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is necessary in the art of medicine; and it is the treatment of fractures and accidental dislocations of the bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh, son, know that this chapter speaks of the foolish doctors and the vulgar ones and those who at no time looked at the free books of the Ancients or read a letter of them.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason it is necessary that the method of the scientists in our land is reserved; and I have not forgotten it in anything, but have studied their books in length and understood them, unless I drew out the science from them.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And then he began to experiment and study in my youth.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have already described this in this chapter all that concerns my science and upon which is based my experiment; for it has added to the length of my life, because it has released me from occupation with elongation; and has renewed life in me at the end of renewal; and has shown me in the end of declaration; and I have formed in it a variety of shapes of the instruments that are used in it, except by addition of declaration, as I have made it in two previous chapters.
Capitol primier.	Chapter first.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	First chapter: Great and various are the causes of fractures of the bones; those on which the following preposition is necessary before we begin to remark on the members that are broken, and of different kinds.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	And therefore, let us say in the proem of this chapter the great principles of the speech; and the chapters that are to be understood by the artisan on the truth of those; so that you and those who are prompters to learn this noble art from you and others than can teach it.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And I say that when it happens to any fracture or dislocation or twist or impingement, then cover that you are cauterizing at the beginning with bloodletting or laying them down, or all together, if there is no cause to prohibit, so also with a healing of virtue, or it is that which has happened to him, or he is in decrepitude, or it is time for a violent heat, or a violent cold.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	Then put him on his own food of herbs and meat of birds and crabapples; and forbid coarse meat and filling himself with food and all food that fills the veins with blood, until you are sure that there is no pus in cauterization, and if you do not fear a flow of matter into the limb.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	Then return the patient to his first position with him who usually takes care of him.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And when the broken bone begins to be restored, then cover that the patient is being fed with nutritious foods of food and gross and heavy ones in which there is viscosity, so also with foods made from wheat cooked in water, and rice, and cabbages, and feet, and bellies of cows, and geese, and fresh milk, and large and similar to those, and this regime is made a coagulation of the fracture slightly and honey.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And you know that the bones break when they are in men who are in their first youth and in decrepitude, it is not possible that they are continued and consolidated according to their nature by the drying up of the limbs of them.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they are consolidated and continued according to their nature at all times by the drying up of those limbs, and they are continued and consolidated which are of them in the end of the leniency, so also with the bones of small children.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	But nature adjusts and amends on the broken bone from the very beginning any apparent cause of glut that adheres and strengthens that within which is consolidated and bound together, until it comes to the end of strength and firmness, so also with fire at the beginning, until there is no cause to prohibit it from its work.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason it is necessary that you pause the patient's food, foods in which there is gravity and viscosity and grossness, as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	Diversity of fracture according to diversity of the limb.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And you know that the varieties of fracture are diverse according to the diversity of the limbs, for a fracture of the spine is different from a fracture of the head; and a fracture of the foot is different from a fracture of the leg; and similarly all the other members are diverse among themselves.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And I remember with care of all the varieties of fracture, separated in his own chapter from the others.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	Diversity of fracture in itself.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And the varieties of fracture of the bone in itself are diverse; for it is made a curved fracture and another that happens in its stars; and some are made by the length of the bone: and they are the fractures of the skull and the temples and the additions, whether they proceed or do not proceed, also when it is made in the pain when it is prepared to write, and its fracture with a plague and disruption in the head, and its small fracture.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And all this variety is made by nature itself in the restoration of him according to what will come; let us remember it separately according to its places.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	Diversity of fracture of the bone.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And by this is recognized a fracture of the bone: it is tortuosity of it, and from it eminence and appearance of it to the sense, and not from it when you press that one with your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And therefore, when it is not in the apparent place of tortuosity nor is it made by this, then do not do any touch to the patient when you agitate the bone, and if he does not feel great pain, then there is no fracture here.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	And while it is possible that it is tortuosity or a small fracture, then do not cover that you press that one with your hand and compress all of them together; and pause the medicines of which you have memory appropriately at that moment that conveys to the place; and make it straight by subtle strictness.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And you know that the place when it is curved and does not split into two or another that happens in his satagia, if it is re-made all at once from its own beginning, then begin from your own hour to correct it while you are making him a bloodletting cautery.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if you are making him a bloodletting cautery, then leave that one for several days until the bloodletting ceases; and place it according to each way that you can of levitation and invention.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And you know that the restoration of him and the opening up of him is more painful than the fracture of the bone in which this happens to the satagia.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And place it according to what will come, when you remember him.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	But if there are two satagies in the bone, then it is necessary to extend this broken member of two parts, if it is the arm or the leg; or at your hand if the member is small; or at two strings or at a string and at your hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And be your position at which you place the limb extended as it is according to its natural figure, while these parts are extended from the broken limb, then know that you must make a cut for returning those additions by invention and in each way that you can place them in their places.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And take care according to your strength that it does not happen to the patient by your operation or injury; and proceed according to your own power that you apply one bone to another in its company according to its best forms.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And place that one with your hand at that moment appropriately, and if there is any other cause, correct it and place it according to the quantity of your virtue.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And do violent extension and compression, as well as foolish movements that happen in the member when this is made, so also with a violent heat of the limb, as if it were a cause of bloodletting by its operation, or a cause of pain in the member when it has happened to him.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And place it according to its connection and its operation and strictness of that limb, and rest and quietness; tell the patient about this and do not make him move that one in the hour of his vigils and his sleep, and watch his revolution and agitation, and know all his movements at all times with your own virtue; and wait until it is certain that the position of the limb is proper to him, so that pain does not happen to him; and keep in mind that when the position of it is changed, then do not make that member move too much by its connection with that one, and place it according to that one's position so that the member does not break when it is restored.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of the strictness of the limb is what I recommend; so that you know that broken members are diverse in their smallness and size and in the form of them.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And those that are small, as the arm and the foot, so also with a soft skin. And when it is warm, then do not cover that one with a heavy cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	And those that are large, as the shoulder or the back, then cover that one with a skin that is long and hard; for the skin that is soft connects the large member and strengthens it by its whole part with strictness, so that it does not enter into a spot of trouble.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And begin your operation with care on the patient, pause it carefully according to that one, and place it in its place of fracture with three coverings or four according to the limb, and strengthen your hand at all times.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	Then bring him up to where he is most comfortable, and tighten him there so that his pain does not cause him discomfort.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	Then extend him a little more in the wrapping of the broken place, and soften the tightness little by little, until you get from the place a great extension.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	And take another object and wrap that other cloth over the place three times in the wrapping, and bring the wraps to where he is most comfortable from the fracture; and your operation on the tightness of the wrapping and softening of that second one as we said in the first wrapping.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	Then pause between the wraps of stopa lion or cloth so that the curvature of the fracture is engaged in it, if there is a curvature; and if not, do not pause for any reason.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	Then pause on another object, and wrap those that are decently made so far, if there is no swelling or pus in the place, and then pause over that water which causes the pus and which contains the swelling; and leave it for a few days; and then tighten them well.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	Then the sticks for most of the canes should be made of wood, and they should be formed with care; or of cane of palm trees; or of splints of palm; and be the length of each stick according to this shape and this figure:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, let the stick that is placed on that fracture be a little thicker and further away from each other than the other sticks, and the length of the stick according to its size and thinness; and then tighten them with another object according to your first tightness; and then release it little by little according to what we have said about tightness, and let it be tight according to the place of the fracture, and the more it is away from the fracture, the less the tightness.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And let the wires be of moderate thickness and soft, and if they are thick, so much the better; but if they are too thick, so much the worse, for to cut the tightness equally is a great mistake when it is done by cutting with sharp-edged instruments.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And very thin wires are not convenient, for you will not be able to achieve the tightness with those wires; and it is not necessary that there be a distance of a thumb between one stick and another.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient is wrapped with those sticks near the place where you want to achieve the tightness, then pause for a moment so that he does not suffer any injury from that water.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Some broken fractures are caused by falling, and the cause of disruption in the cord, and I come to remember that in the cap when it is unusual.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And you should know that a broken limb does not tighten well with sticks on the first day; which is why, because the limb, when it is large, does not stop pain from coming when it is placed on sticks for three or seven or more days, according to your security about the arrival of pus.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	And this is the way in which the ancient surgeons used to treat it, by placing them on fractures and dislocations and twists.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Way of wrapping like a damp cloth for the restoration of fracture, convenient to complex things and mostly to women and children, because it is that by which you take away the heat and friction: and this is that you take powder of flour, and that is the flour's mediastem in the movement of the mill on the parts of the mill.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And thus take him as he is, but rather take him from the egg of hen, and stop up the hole with plaster that does not spread or become thin; and use that one.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another way of applying the poultice for healing fractures and dislocations and twists: take assafetida, lapdanum, acacia, aniseed, and marshallwort, which is called milgrane salvay, all in equal parts; from mirrra and aloe, five parts; alochole, two parts; and all are ground and mixed with water or milk until it becomes a paste. For this composition, because it is of good composition, restores broken bones lightly, and gives life to old men.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another way of applying the poultice that you give life to fractures and twists: take marshallwort and met of white oak in equal parts; from mirra and aloe, a part; from acacia, six parts; and from white oak, twenty parts.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All are wrapped in three parts of mortar and crumbled, and they are crumbled with water or egg white and given to the patient.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Way of wrapping for the joints and bones that are separated from their places, and also for pains, fissures, and fractures: take woolen thread and immerse it in wine and olive oil, and then wrap it over the place.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	Not useful for this wrapping to restore, from pus, and to expel pains itself.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another way of wrapping that restores broken bones: take leaves of fig tree and leaves of wild poppy; roll them all up together, and make a wrap of them.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida .i.; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	The way of wrapping for the restoration of bone fracture and when you want to get rid of pus is made from razes of almond, from chamomile flowers and violets, from wheat flour, and all of them together. All are three times wrapped and given to the patient if the member is not scratched.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	But if it is scratched, then take him by the hand, dip it in cold water or olive oil, and use it.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another way to get rid of pus and a resolution that comes first, when it causes pus: take razes of almond and fennel seed, and horeamand and marjoram flowers, and all of them together; all are three times wrapped and given to the patient according to the quality of the member and rest for color.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	But if you have a piece of wax in your hand that is placed on the broken limb, it will not restore it without oil, and do not add anything else to it; and consider whether it should be made thick or thin.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	But if you place some salt on the broken limb, it will restore it without oil, and consider whether it is appropriate to do so according to the causes of drying that we have mentioned, such as mirra, honey, and other similar things.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	Way of wrapping that you give to an injury and pain: take mugget, hazelnuts, almond slivers or goose feathers, and mint leaves, and all of them together; three times wrapped and crumbled, and then given to the patient.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	But the amount is given according to the quantity of salt that causes a burning sensation in the wrap and then it is removed, consider whether it has happened because of pain or pus or if the bone is broken, then do not remove any part of the wrap for several days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if there is a painful pain or pus or swelling at the place, then you will take out that wrap in the hour, and then apply salt to it.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	And take cloth of linen and a sponge of the sea and dip that in wine and wash it, and then apply that water to the place until the pain and swelling cease, and then rest the member for an hour; then pause over the woolen cloth dipped in vinegar and olive oil or rosewater, and then reapply that to the place until you are sure of pus, and let it stop the swelling of the member, and calm its pain.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat the same constriction gently and carefully for your first contraction, and softly to that inside which needs to be healed.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if times that the swelling and the pain and the inflammation and all those accidents have already been remedied entirely, and you are tired of paste and constriction, then do so again with the same treatment as you did at the beginning.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o .vii.; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if nothing happens to the member from those causes that we have said, then do not wait more than three days or four or five or six; And some have left it for twenty days according to what you see with your own eyes from the slippage of the member, as we have said, until the fracture sticks together, and if it is placed on the clotting of the flesh over that.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	Then adjust it more tightly than in your first contraction altogether, and adjust the thickness of the patient's food as it is preceded by the remembrance of him.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	More if you see the place of the fracture has dried up and become thinner than it used to be, then know that nutrition is forbidden to reach it; and therefore immerse it in cold water every day until it is completely healed; and ease the constriction a little bit for this operation, and bring food to the member, and heal a little.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	More if it is that the восстановители of the fracture of the member do not restore at the beginning, according to what it covers, and restore according to the tortuosity, it is an error according to its operation, and great fear, and if it is dried out, it will make the ancients grow larger in their free parts and endure with water.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And I have not seen one of them doing this, so it is more reasonable that it does not do it.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Capitol according to: Of a fracture when it happens on the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The types of fractures are different, and the causes are distinct, because some fractures are caused by a blow from a spear or other sharp object, and the blow breaks the bone completely inside the skin, leaving it exposed, so this type of fracture is called an ascial fracture; or the spear pierces a part of the bone, and it pierces the flesh and does not go deeper than the back of it; and this type of fracture is called an absolute elevation.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the plague of these two types of fractures is great or small, and the fracture that is contracting or narrowing; and its cause is a blow with a spear or a hard object striking on the head, and they resemble each other.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture is penetrating, so it brings the skin closer to the bone; or it is on the face of the bone, and the plague of these two types of fractures is great or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And some fractures are healed in the bone, in the subtlety of the small hair, and this type of fracture is called the capillary fracture.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And this is a fracture that is caused by a hard object or a blow from the side, and it enters some of the bone's parts, and it is made in the concave place, as if it happens to the tendons when they are struck by their blows and they break into the parts inside them.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	And mainly it is made in the bones' bodies of human beings, as if they are caps of candles.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And thus all these types of fractures heal, and they are difficult to heal in the same way that you separate them.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And I come with the remembrance of everything in its place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	I have learned all these types of fractures by detection of those and by investigation of their causes and the obstinate resistance of corrupt flesh that is over them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And the capillary specialty is known by the hair that is found on the bone, and it is washed over, and it limits itself to it, because the fracture appears dark.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	More in the treatment of fractures, from the beginning, consider the accidents of the patient, and if you see through the accidents that mean danger by clear sign over pain, as if vomiting from cholera, and its extension, and loss of reason, and fainting, and high fever, and the appearance of gas in their breath, and the smell of it, and similar things to those accidents in the major situations, it is not treated unless it is healed.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if you do not hope for non-dangerous accidents, then begin the patient' treatment.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	The reason is that if it has come to you, the plague has come at the beginning, and if it comes in the winter days, then know that you are studying the resistance of the bone before the thirteenth day according to all situations.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is in the summer days, then know that you are waiting for the bone to heal before the seventh day, while knowing that the skin left behind the bone is rotten from the panicle, and that those accidents happen which we have said.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already reached the skin covering the neck, and it is broken into pieces and narrowing, then know that you are breaking the broken piece in a small way, according to what I have said before.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And that you are breaking the head of the patient' plague, and discovering the bone according to custom and the way to do it as you can, according to the shape of the plague.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if it happens to you, detect the bone, and let blood from a wound or poultice on it, then pause it with a cold poultice, and it is that you place the poultice in the bone's place, and in its absorption.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	That should be according to one of two ways of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the first way is that you cut the bone with a sharp knife in a straight line, and this is the way of it: And then you administer another knife like it, slightly smaller than that one; and this is the way of it:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And then add more of the wider knife than the second one.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	Then know that you have different kinds of knives, some of which are wider than others; and some of them are narrower than others, and they are sharp at the end of their sharpness, and they are made of iron or steel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use them according to their ease in striking the knife so that it does not make a sound, and let it be hit by the knife at the end of its stroke, and let it be hit in such a way that it does not make a sound on the bone.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is strong and hard, then know that you pierce in the bone's circuit before you administer knives to it, those which are called not deep.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And these are not called in such a way because they do not stop the term of the bone's test at water that is near it, because the knife has a rounded edge or a small circle on it, which prevents it from being submerged and passing through the bone' thickness.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	And it is convenient that you take a great number of these knives, each suited to the thickness of each bone, except for the one in the neck, where the end is sharp, the length and brevity are according to the amount of thickness of this test.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	And this is the shape of three types of knives: The quality of piercing in the bone's circuit is that you place the knife on the bone and turn it with a stick, so that you know that the bone has been pierced; and then move the knife to another location, and pause it that it is between all the thickness of the ray or wrap it around.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And insert the incisers where there is a break in each bone, and make a small wound that you can put over it so as to float, as we have said, until you remove the bone or your own hand, or some other instrument by which you will approach water, with the help of which you will use needles and forceps.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And be very careful that the inciser does not touch any part of the body.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And when you have gone around the bone, separate it from the body if it continues to move, and take it out, being careful not to touch it with any instrument that resembles an incisor, but rather use a sharp and fine needle, because it is more difficult to remove than the others.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if there is a small piece of bone that is broken and loose, take it out with ease as you would with the tools; then clean the wound with lime and water.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And another way of doing the operation is by cutting off, far from pain, which is what Guilia and Lausa did with great skill; and this is how it goes: it is necessary that you begin to uncover the break in the bone where the fracture is more violent and visible, so that when you have uncovered that part and have paused, you will have reached the end of this incisor slowly and gently, which is the shape:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And the round break is sharp and does not touch any part, and the acute break is in two pieces of length, sometimes forward, so that the round break is fitted to the body, with its acute edge on the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And hit it with the incisor on one edge of a small piece, so that you cut all the bone easily like this, and if there is any danger in this way, which no one knows, or if it is a deadly poison; certainly, and if it was sleeping.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	If it should happen that there is a part of the body attached to the bone in some place, cut it with ease with this incisor, because it will be easily removed from the body, lest there be any danger or pain.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the bone fracture does not penetrate into the body, and what is broken is on the surface of the bone, and there are small and sharp edges, then when you remove those edges with sharp needles, prepare a number of them of various sizes so that you can administer them in all possible ways; use the ones most convenient to you at each place, and the most appropriate for those who are suffering from pain.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And when you administer the needle with a broad point at the beginning of the procedure, use the sharpest one; and then continue using them in succession until you reach the end of giving the injection, using the sharpest ones first.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	For any small hairline fractures or subtle breaks, administer care according to the course of treatment that you have decided upon.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	This is why they do not agree on all points in that art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And he writes about these large fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	If the pannicle is rectangular when you cut off the bone, then take a piece of cloth according to the amount of wound, and dip it in rose oil; place that over the orifice of the wound; and then take another piece of cloth, folded or triple, and dip it in vinegar and rose oil, and place that over the first cloth; and then administer the ointment in a thin layer as much as the wound requires.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	Let the wound heal with this treatment for a day or two until you are sure that there will be no suppuration; and then clean it and administer medicines that are not necessary to dry it out, such as flour of erysipelas and powder of endives and dandelion, and similar things.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	This is because you must spray these medicines on the wound as much as they are dry; and generally, administer all medicines in a thin liquid form so that they do not stick.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	Keep in mind that your cure should be clean; and do not use something like a balm in which the wound becomes infected; nor do you add virulence to it; because when it is applied to the pannicle of the skull, it corrupts it and harms it, and causes evil on the patient.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And you cause harm to the skull when it is removed from the body, more so when the cure for it is not completed; and if you consider this carefully, you will see that all of these things are dangerous in themselves.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas .iii., e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	If you do not cause harm from the medicine itself, but rather from the benefit of that medicine, then take a piece of honey and some rose oil; and put them in a cloth; and place that over the skull; and then heal it with the spices of treatment as much as it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	On the Restoration of the Nose When It is Broken
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	You know that the nose is not broken from two separate pieces of cartilage, or one of those small bones, because it has only bone; and there is no fracture, but rather a bump and some curvature and deformation.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	But if one of the two pieces is broken, then you must push the small bone into its place inside the nose, and the other piece outside, so that the nose returns to its natural shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	Do it easily for yourself, and be careful not to harm the patient with your procedure on their nose.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	If the fracture is in the upper most part of the nose, and it does not reach that bone, then make it equal to the end of the ridge where it is a little thin.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	If the fracture is in two pieces, then you make the nose look like that.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	Rest and do not do anything to the nose on the first day of the fracture, if possible; otherwise, by the seventh day, take a rest from work with regard to suppuration.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	Then insert a piece of cloth into the end of the nose, if the fracture is in one part, or two pieces, and make it the width of the nose ridge by adding as much as it needs to fill that ridge.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And I say some of the old restoratives that the calve is wrapped in a bandage, and they are changed every day, but I have not seen it; provided that the calve is wrapped in album from beef suet mixed with powder; and then let it rest until the bone has hardened and the cartilage has been strengthened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	Some are wrapped in the nose, instead of calve, lest they be closed by a bandage wrapped too tightly around the nose; and that it is already broken from the most violent fracture, and that the patient may not be forbidden to breathe.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	This is not necessary for you; and if you want to, make it one piece, and if you want to, make two pieces.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if there is another suppuration, insert the nose with a cerat in vinegar and rose oil, or with a cotton-wool plug; or with diaquelone.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	But if there is no suppuration, then you insert it outside with flour of erysipelas and powder of endives in beef suet; and then place it over the nose so that it does not stick to anything.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	If the bones of the nose are broken or crushed, then cut them apart and remove those with instruments that suit them; and then sew up the wound, treating that which is infected and solidifying it and applying plasters as necessary.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	And if plague occurs inside the nose, then you must treat that with calamine and administer lead cathartics so that it is completely cured.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter .iiii.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	Restoring the jaw when it is dislocated.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jaw is broken and the fracture is not accompanied by plague, regard if it is out of place only slightly and is not bent or twisted inside, then its recovery will be easy.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	And therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, you should introduce the little finger of your left hand into the mouth of the patient; and likewise, if the fracture is on the left side, then insert the little finger of your right hand; and gently push the fracture out of place with the other hand, holding it in position with that of the injured side; do this carefully and skillfully.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the jaw fracture has separated into two pieces, then you must administer extension of two parts according to their position so that the alignment is possible.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if there is a concussion of the teeth, then strengthen those which you hope will endure with gold, silver, or cedar; and place wax on the broken jaw, and place a double cloth over it, and carefully place a single thread along its length; and place a weight on it according to whether it is suitable for binding and applying it, so that it is not destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And order the patient to rest and be calm, and provide him with sour drinks.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you suspect that the shape has been altered in some way, then you shall cover it and leave it for three days; and then correct what has been distorted with dust of mulberry, chalk, or flour of cypress, because you will have removed the wax from it, and place wool over the plaster.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And then, once it is settled and adjusted, leave it, that you do not disturb it until it has healed completely and strengthened the fracture; for if the fracture remains untreated for three weeks, it will be difficult to heal.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if any other fever occurs, then administer calamine to it that has been seen in the patient's sweat before it is healed, and remove the puss from it.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is infected, then consider whether it is a small piece of bone or a large one, then you shall prepare those that are large with an instrument that suits them; and administer water to remove any of those on the instruments.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the wound from the plague is narrow, then you shall increase it with a scalpel according to the quantity of your need.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And then, once you have removed those that are large, and if any remain, then patch them up with calamine so that they are healed; and if any puss remains, place it under a plaster so that it is healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter.v.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	Restoring the fork when it is dislocated.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	The bones of the fork are broken in one of three ways when the fracture is made from the front at the edge of the muscle.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	It may be broken, separated, or separated into two pieces that do not cause any pain; and it is easy to restore it; or it may cause pain in some parts of the fork; and its restoration is difficult; or if the fracture is infected.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And the operation in that, when the fracture is infected, is that you present two assistants, so that one holds the fork and fixes it, and the other extends the blood vessel at the break.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	And then bring the fracture together with the fingers so that it takes its natural shape, and not in its little prominence or concave shape.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if you have a cold sweat, then pause the stinging of the patient' hand with a cloth or wool, and make the size larger or smaller according to your need; and extend and raise the fork, and fix it with a bandage so that it takes its correct shape.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot fix the extremities of the fork to the outside parts, because it comes into contact with the neck, then the patient should be placed on his back; and place a cushion under his head, and position a cloth half the size in front of him.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the assistant presses the muscle in front of where the bones of the fork are raised so that they are above the neck; and then you correct the fracture and bring it together with the fingers.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	If you feel pain in the fork or it is difficult to move, then cut those out and remove them easily.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is stuck in the bone, then you shall use a sharp instrument from your tools that you have placed in water; for you have left the fork alone; and this is the shape of the instrument:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And it is like a horn from which this is the shape of the concave; and its size according to the water that you have provided for it, according to the size of the bone or the lack of it.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	Then the length of the fork should be as it is for you to operate on; and there should be two ends, one wide and the other narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the pain of the plague that you have cut out from the bone is wide, and you are sure that it is a puss, then you shall join the two edges of the wound with a stitch.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the disruption is little, or you fear puss, then you shall use cloth and powder according to the quantity of the wound.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if any pain occurs, then pour wine vinegar and rosewater onto it, and place a cloth on it.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	Then the stricture of the bone when it is infected and separated, is that you patch it with flour of mulberry applied with egg white, and place a cloth on it; and then you shall use an iron hook, which is long and sharp, so that it reaches the edge of the fracture, if necessary, and torches the skin from it; and then apply powder to the wound.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And all of this is to prevent the fracture from opening; and so that you may see the patient every day, if the bandage is wet or unfastened, then you shall correct what has been distorted and tighten the bandage.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And then place the patient to sleep on his neck, and leave the stinging of the neck slightly apart; so that the support of the neck is raised above the neck, and thus raise the fracture of the fork at the edge of the muscle; or let it rest against the neck.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And you shall not remove the bandage if there is no pain in it immediately or puss, until twelve days have passed.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And if he is seen to have a feverish face, then apply the plaster again and tighten it and restore that which has been broken; let rest until it has been healed and the fracture has been clotched.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And if he is strengthened and comforted according to the season in 28 days, and in some men it takes a longer time for that;
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	Of the Restoration of the Fracture of the Shoulder-blade.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The spatula is broken in the place of the shoulder, and not broken from the shoulder, but only the edges are broken.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And when it is broken in the middle, and not known by touch, then according to the shape of the fracture prepare it and reduce it according to the natural figure in all ways; by means of which it can be done with ease.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	Then sprinkle over the place a powder of wheat flour and stop it with honey; and place over it a cloth that is doubled, and place on it a thin board according to the quantity of the spatula, or less.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	Or if in some places the place of the spatula is hollow, then you fill that hollow with honey; and place the board according to equality.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	Then tighten it with a long hammer, and fasten the board so that it is not shaken from its place.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And consider the joint every day; and wherever it is soft, tie it again, and tighten the board if it is shifted from its place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	Then pull the patient onto his back.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	And the spatula is restored in 20 days or in 25.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And when that number is completed, then you dissolve the joint, and that you know for certain that it is of the bones from which it did not break; nor did its dissolution cause any pain.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you cut the place of the bone and leave it with astringent; then you split it open, and stop it up; and do according to what has been said in the fracture of the clavicle by apothecaries' poultice if this occurs here.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	Of the Restoration of the Fracture of the Foot.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The foot, in some cases, is broken in the middle and then healed within; but the extremities of it are sometimes dislocated and broken.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And of the accidents of the foot when it is broken in the middle, that it tilts towards the inside and causes great pain, difficulty in walking, coughing, hard breathing, and vomiting; and is declared in the cavity of the bone that has been broken, and does not conceal itself from sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And the restoration of it is that the patient be laid on his back, and a cushion placed between his thighs; and press the muscles of it, and adjust the ribs of it to the sides of two ribs, and make a point carefully in the operation of it and in the adjustment according to all ways that can be done so as to bring back the figure of the bone according to what can be done, until the figure of the bone is returned according to what has been said.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	Then place the plaster and straw over it, and a board of thin wood placed under it; and tighten that which is on the shoulder, so as not to be moved; and consider the tightening every hour, and when it has become soft, tighten it again.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	And if necessity compels you to remove the plaster from that part for any reason, or because of pain, or pus, which occurs in that place, then you cut and remove it, and correct that part by means of healing; and return the plaster to its place, if it has been removed a little way by water; and tighten that which is on it until it is healed.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	Of the Restoration of the Ribs When They are Broken.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	Know that the fracture of the ribs occurs only in the thick parts which join together; and does not occur at the extremities from dislocation, because they are cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And the feeling of the patient is not hidden from inquiry by means of touch.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration be thus that it is joined together by means of touch according to all possible ways, until it is completely joined; and is plastered and tightened on the bone with a board, if you are afraid of that.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And if the fracture of the ribs is inclined towards the inside and dislocated, then occurs with it great pain and stinging, so as to occur with that which has been weeping, and because of the wetness of the bone; and happens with it a difficulty in breathing, coughing, and hard breathing; and this is difficult to heal.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And the ancient ways have been made by nature for those parts.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And for this purpose: that you stop the patient's eating, which causes swelling and inflammation, so that the belly may be swollen and extended, and the fracture driven towards the outside.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	And let us avoid water, so that it does not cause a loose movement to generate pus by means of which the fracture is driven towards the outside; and if this already occurs, then help it on with water.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And they say that it is stopped from eating and let it drink strongly; and it is similar to reasoning, but yet is feared that drinking may throw out the excesses to the place because of its weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	And they say that the place be covered with wool which has already been soaked in oil, and let them be placed between the ribs until it is filled, so as to cover completely; and let it be cleaned from the patient by means of healing from weeping and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if it causes great pain to contract the patient's skin, and the bone is poked by a sharp instrument, then they fear that the patient will die, so let them be covered over the place, uncover the rib that has been broken, and remove that which maintains the cypher, recalling the memory of it, and inscribe the bone with ease, and extract it.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	Then let us adjust the two sides of the wound, if it is large, with a burn, and heal that part with plaster until it is healed.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if pus occurs inside, then you cut and place in oil rosewater and place over the place, and let it be cleaned by means of healing water which has been covered with oil rosewater.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And be laid onto his back on which he sleeps, until it is healed.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	Of the Restoration of the Fracture of the Vertebrae of the Back and Neck.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Sometimes the vertebrae in the neck are broken, and also at the base of the skull, and similar to the vertebrae in the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And if you wish to know whether it will be healed or not, then consider, because if the patient's pain is lessened and his feeling of it is dull, and he can move those parts a little way, but feels pain when they are stretched or tightened, then you know that it cannot be healed, and in all cases of such a fracture, it is fatal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if those parts feel a constriction when touched and stinging, then you know that the vertebrae in the neck are saved, and the patient is healed by means of healing.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you see the vertebrae in the back similar to water, and wish to know whether it will be healed or not, then consider the patient's legs.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	If the pain is already softened, it happens as it does to everyone, and if you get on top of him, there will be wind and excretion at his will, some are raised above their legs and want to urinate and cannot, then you know that it is fatal, and do not work in his treatment.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	But if there is no cause of those, the cause is better and lighter.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And the treatment of him is that you pierce to the spine behind it or hold a hot iron against it, or put molasses in his mouth so that he swallows it, or give him a drink; put it on that some are raised, and he will have relief.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	Then put one of the poultices that comfort and exist, and strengthen it with a ligature; and order the patient to rest and be calm and not sleep on the part that hurts him so that he is healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if there is a fracture of the bone or some cause that has already separated from him, then you cover it with a cloth and tie it up tightly and cut the two lips of the wound; and if they are large, then stitch them together; and then treat those with ingrown nails, so that he is healed.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	But if the back of the leg is broken and this is the end of the fracture, then you cover it with a cloth and tie it tightly and cut the two lips of the wound; and if they are large, then stitch them together; and then treat those with ingrown nails, as much as possible by degree according to the situation; and put a poultice on him and wrap it up, if you want to, and strengthen it.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel a fracture in him, then you cover it and cut the wound; and treat it with treatment that precedes it so that it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De restauracio de la ancha.	Of restoration of the limb.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the limbs are broken, and if they are broken, then their fracture is only a communication at the ends of them and they are lowered in length and decline to the ends; and pain occurs at the place and it pricks, and the chest is stunned when the fracture occurs.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And the restoration of him is that you extend your hand over him so that it is above the fracture which is the figure of him.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	And if the fracture is only at the end of him, then you swallow it according to what is on your body by degree so that it is put together with his natural figure.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	But if the fracture is in length or has already declined to the ends, then you make him lie on his stomach so that he is prepared for you to restore that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And when you have put it together, then put a poultice on him, and place a leather strap or ligature over it, and tighten it tightly so that there is no pain of fracture or movement of the stela.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And swallow the cavity with water that fills it up, within that it takes the tightness according to equality, and order the patient to sleep on his back or open his side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	But if there is an apoplexy, then you cease from the excretion of him and his treatment so that he is relieved from the apoplexy, and put a cloth over the water which is on it according to what has preceded; and then return to the treatment of him, and strengthen him in this way with a cloth.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if there are fractures or they have been broken, then you treat them.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	Of restoration of the fracture of the leg.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	Adjuditor is that which is between the hip and the top of the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is broken, then the restoration of him is in one of two ways, which is that you put a wooden staff on his back according to this form:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And they are tied with two ligaments, and be suspended from the elevated place.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And follow the patient on a stool; and then pour out his broken arm onto the wood in the place where it reaches to the top of him, so that it is attached to the curvature of the wood.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And suspend him over some difficult cause, or the patient's food is extended to his ends; and then give him medicine that the fracture joins together according to what has been done, so that the fracture returns according to what happens.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And the other way is that the patient is raised over his neck and suspended with a ligature from his collarbone; and then order two servants that one of them hold water that reaches the fracture with his hands; and another holds pus in him; and each of them extends to the ends of him.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want the excretion to be stronger, then you strengthen it with a ligature on the fracture and on him with another ligature, and each of the two servants extends to his two ends.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And if the fracture is close to the end of the muscle, then you cover it so that half of the ligament is over the cervical bone and the other is suspended on the fracture which is between them.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And apparently if the fracture is close to the hip, then you cover it so that the ligament is over the place and on the hip.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Swallow it with ease and work, and when it is put together according to what has been done, then strengthen it if there is no apoplexy.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	But if there is an apoplexy, then let the tightness remain for seven days, and put a lamb's wool under it soaked in vinegar and oil, within that it stops the apoplexy, and then strengthen it.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	And the way to strengthen that is to put a poultice on the fracture, and then cover it with a cloth; and then adjust his arms over the adjuditor, and place your hand on his back over the muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And then put the cloth and strengthen it on the adjuditor's arm so that the arm is in place of the bone, unless it is forbidden by any cause of the broken leg.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	Then use it.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And this is that you put a leather strap on the fracture which is stronger and more difficult on either side of it; and place between each stela the distance of a finger, and make the length of the straps according to the fracture plus three times the length of the whole limb.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And then strengthen them with a tightness that was mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And this is that your tightness on the place of the fracture be stronger.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And when the apoplexy has been relieved, then reduce the tightness.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And if you see how the situation of the straps and the tightness have changed since you restored the limb to its place, then you treat it.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear an apoplexy, then you leave the tightness and the straps for seven days since we have spoken about it.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And then consider the ligament in all its parts for three days so that it does not happen in the place of pressure or swelling; or if food is prohibited from reaching the limb due to an excessive tightness; and then correct everything according to what we have spoken about.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	But if you are sure that there is no cause of it, then do not remove the ligature for three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And this is that the patient sleeps on his back, and his arms are over his neck; and his legs are over his chest.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And put a full lamb' wool on the adjuditor' coccyx, and consider it every hour of the night or day that the figure of the broken limb does not change or that the ligament is soft, then correct the water completely with your power.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And place the patient's food according to the order we mentioned above, so that it is thin at first but becomes thicker as it is consumed. And then cover it when it thickens.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	And it is usual that the servant and the cushion of the patient be tightened in ten days; and then release them, give a bath and medicate them with oil to heal those who are injured by it.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is not painful, then you do not release the bandage and the splint in a day or two months.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter 12.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	The Restoration of Fractures of the Arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The arm is composed of two bones that are called the "forearm" and the "upper arm," respectively. The smaller one is what you call the "wrist," and the other is called "elbow," and it is from where the wrist starts to be separated.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	Very strong is the fracture of only one bone, or both, very strong are their fractures together.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when the small bone is broken above, then the restoration of it is easier, and its healing is faster.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	But when the small bone is broken below, then the fracture is bad and its healing difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And even worse when both bones are broken together.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore, if the bone that is broken is the small one above, then it is convenient to the doctor, in order to restore it, to make a small incision easily before that it is healed.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	But if the big bone is the one that is broken, then it is necessary that an incision be made more violently.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both bones are broken together, then you must cut them with a very strong knife.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And since you have fixed the limb of the patient on a cushion, and his hand is over the area, higher than all the others, and the ear is lower than all the others, and the patient lies on a raised bed.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And be a cushion in front of him or behind him, so that the patient does not work.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	Then the minister extends the patient's arm with his hand or splint over him, and another minister puts a cloth on it.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	And the doctor ties the bone in such a way that it does not move, according to the best figure he can make.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if in the fracture of the bone there is a pain, then you should pierce it with an injection of your medicine in its place.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if the fracture of it is not to your expectation in restoring it, then you must be careful and do it according to the method we mentioned above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	But if the fracture is painful, I have already written a special chapter, and then take the cure for it.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if an apoplexy occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then you should place a thin cloth over it, made of wool and wax, and it should be neither too hot nor too cold, and a thick cloth should be placed under it, and then you should put plaster on it prepared with powdery molasses mixed with clarified honey, and place stirrups; and let the stirrup that is placed on that fracture be on one side and the other strong.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	You know that the names of the splints of the arm are found in the majority of cases, or a fracture in one bone or both bones together.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	And then you should place your stricture in the place of the fracture strongly and violently, and if it is remembered, as we mentioned at the beginning of this chapter, then place a little less violent one; according to that the memory of it comes back to mind at the beginning of this chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the clothes that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft and smooth, and not hard or rough, and the thread with which it is sewed must be fine and strong, just as we have described.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	Consider the limb with its splint for ten days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if there is any reason to correct something, such as pain that occurs in the limb, then you should put it in water at the end, so that this pain stops.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And do not let the limb rest too long, and then return to tighten the splint.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the splint is already soft and the bone has healed with it, then you should correct everything according to your medicine.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And consider if the nutrition of the limb is prevented by the excess of the splint, for it is known that it softens a little and leaves it for several days so that the nutrition reaches it, and then tighten it again.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	But if there is no reason for the causes that we mentioned, then it is not necessary to take it off within a certain time or environment.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	Then hang the patient on a sturdy pole because of his ability to move, and let him sleep on his back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	You know that this fracture is restored in 30 or 32 days, and very strong is restored in 28 days, and everything is according to the method of complicated and strong methods.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter 13.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	The Restoration of Fractures of the Wrist and Hands.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	You know that in the wrist and fingers with their nails there is often a fracture, and it does not occur at the end but in the middle.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when it occurs in the hand or at its end, then the patient should lie on his back, and place his hand extended over him according to equality, and then tie it tightly with a cloth.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	Then the minister extends the broken bones of the patient and ties them together, making a good knot.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	Then you should put plaster and sand on it if there is no apoplexy, and place a stirrup above according to the quantity of space, and then you should wrap that in cloth.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	But if the injury is inside the hand, from the back of the palm, then make a cloth cap, and order that it be tightened with the long cloth; and let the doctor tighten it.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	Then place a coin of copper on the cloth where it is lifted up, so that the copper is applied to the palm, and tighten it according to what we have said above.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	But if the fracture is outside the hand, then you should place a stirrup over it, and another one to the left of it in the palm, so that the hand can be opened; and then tighten the splint according to what we have mentioned above.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	And if it is a fracture in the fingers of the hand, then, if it is the little finger, tighten it according to what we said above, and if it is the ring finger or the middle finger, then you should place an additional stirrup, as we mentioned above; and if there is no need to do so, then you should not tie it.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	But if the fracture is in any of the other fingers, then place it at the same position as we mentioned above, or in the middle, or in the index, or in the ear, or in the ring finger, then tie them tightly with a cloth according to that finger; and if it is necessary to tie all of them together, then do so.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider, in your restoration, and tighten it above, the cure of apoplexy, as we mentioned above, according to the medicine of your doctor.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter .XIV.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	On the restoration of a broken bone in the thigh.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The thigh bone, once broken and set, is to be considered as a whole, considering the front part as superior and the back part as inferior.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	And the restoration of it is to be done so that the ligament is strengthened over the fracture and another ligament is left over the fracture, and the patient is prostrate on his belly and on his face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	And the minister extends all the ligament to its width according to the quality, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	But if it is opposite to the root of the thigh, then extend the ligament towards the back at the edge of the fracture, so that the extension comes together, and leave the fracture with another ligament.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And if the break is opposite to the back, then extend the ligament towards the back and leave the extension at the edges.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And the doctor joins the bone together at both ends until it is reduced according to its natural shape and the bone is joined together well - then cover with plaster and tighten, if this does not happen to the limb it will put out.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	But if this happens in the limb, then leave it for a few days until the pustule opens, and then return to your treatment.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The tightening of it is to be done thus: cover with a hard bandage over the fracture, fold it twice or three times, and remove any excess; and then wrap up the leg so that it does not reach the thigh bone and the root of the thigh.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And insert a long thread between the thigh and the leg at the back, to the edges, and bring the ends of the thread from the superior edge of the two parts, and then wind it around the leg and the thigh, and remove what is excess from the bandage.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And place on the thigh in the place of that fracture a long staff, and place another staff over the bone of the leg.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	And fill up the spaces between the leg and the thigh with soft stuffs, so that the tightening may be firm.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And begin the tightening of it strongly on the middle of the fracture with three or four wrappings, and when you have lessened the ligament at the place of the fracture, your tightening is to be lesser and lighter and moister.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	And extend the two ends of the thread to the edges until it reaches the cavity of the foot, and strengthen both ends of the strings of the other part so that the ligament is not pulled out of its place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And leave the tightening on it, in which case there should be no occurrence of pain or swelling or loss of breath or similarity to those; and if any cause occurs, then take care of it with care, and correct what has occurred, according to what we have said above.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is heavy, then cover it according to what is possible for you; and if not, leave it open and treat it with water, and cure with that water in which it has been immersed until it heals.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	In some cases this fracture of the thigh is strengthened by what is adjusted to it, as we have said above in the assistant and in the arms.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	But in the restoration of it in such a way no occurrence of pain is to be expected; and if it is restored by itself, then apply another leg, which should always cause pain.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And know that the thigh is strengthened in ten days or a little more or less, and all of this depends on the variety of complexions and other conditions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter .XV.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	On the restoration of a fracture in the heel bone.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	Do you know that fracture of the tibia of the leg is more common than those on the outside.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	May happen then that if fracture, then it is not so much as a crack or split in the bones and joints, and this is called a pain or ache, and on account of which all is done with attention.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And the repair of it is to be done in such a way that it may be joined together again, and fitted as well as possible, according to ease and convenience, and with proper material.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	Then place plaster and bandage on that foot if you wish, and tighten it firmly so as to be suitable for the walk.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	And consider all the provisions that we have recommended for other fractures, so also here, is to be done in such a way as to prevent any accident from happening on it, and in order to heal it completely until it is well.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter 16.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the spine.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	Do you know that in the back there are two bones, one of which is thick, and is called by name the spine; and the other is thin, and is called by name the breastbone?
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	May happen to any of the various fractures of the arm that may happen to the two bones of it, and for this reason the restoration of it is the same as the restoration of the arm, and the operation is one.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if you break both bones together, the back is broken in all its parts.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if only the smaller bone is broken, the back is broken to the front.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if you break the larger bone, it turns out on the side of the breastbone, and this is one of those causes that are not pleasing to you.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	Then administer the necessary stretching and binding of the limbs according to that engagement.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	However, if the fracture of the spine is caused by the bones not being able to move together, then the stretching should be less severe and more moderate, and it will please you.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And in the back there is a cause of operation on the arm, and it is when you bind the bones together with a rope or thong, and do this whole operation, then take some fists of a kind of wood, which are placed between the causes that are bound together, and which are not large, and are not suitable for big hands, and which are long according to the length of the back, and from the heel at the end on the side where it is thick.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	Then wrap a cloth around each limb twice according to the length of it, and place one over the side of the back of one part and the other on the other side, and both from the heel at the end on the side where it is thick.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	Then tie the two limbs at three places from the two extremities and at one place in the middle, for with this stretching the back does not curve to the right or left, and so it is good standing.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And one kind of wood has already been administered according to the length of the back; and let the spine be bound in order that it retain its mobility.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And finally, when you have broken this, then call it a disease properly so that it may be cured.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And consider the spine every day and study it well, so that you may know it better, and guard it from any swelling or inflation or similar causes; and if some cause of those happens, then prevent it on the patient in order that he be healed completely.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter 17.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	Of the fracture of the neck and bones of the head and face.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	To the neck there does not happen a fracture of all; but to the bones of the head there may happen a fracture in some places; and to the teeth only little does it happen, and happens to them only in the middle part of their disposition.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if there is a fracture of the bones of the head and these are elevated above themselves, then the patient must be placed on the ground in preparation for this.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	Then place one foot on that which is raised by those bones, and press it down, and bind them together within their places.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	Then place plaster and bandage on it, and place under the stomach of the head a small table at which there are two faces turned towards each other.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	Then tighten that by stretching it downwardly, for you have wrapped it with clothes and with other causes of which you are unaware.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And when three or four days have passed, then you will loosen the binding, because you would see the bones bound together, or broken or out of place; and the operation in those is like this.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	And if any of these teeth are broken, then restore them, and bind those together in such a way that you may not forget how to restore the others of the mouth.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	Then place the broken tooth on that table according to its length, and place under it slightly to the left; then tighten that by stretching downwardly as you were told.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	And if the broken tooth of the bones is two or three or more, then you place each one on a kind of tooth according to its quantity wrapped in cloth, and tighten the table at the bottom of the head, and let it stand on one of the faces of the table so that it has good retention.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	It is convenient to you that you do not forget that you should take into consideration all the causes which I have told you in other fractures of the accidents that we have said; and prevent it on the patient from any accident.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter 18.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	Of the fracture of the hipbone of the woman and of the arm of the hand and of the staff of the man.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the hipbone of the woman is broken, then place it on two chairs, and tilt it slightly towards the side where it is thick; and let it be supported behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	Then the wife should tie her hip on the chair, and sit it firmly there; and when the woman is moved, then raise the two small limbs little by little, for all this is done outside while looking at the side where the hipbone is thick so that it does not come out.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	Then place a cloth over the two limbs, and when it wishes to urinate, remove the cloth quickly with ease, and reduce it again as it returns according to the manner in which it was placed at first; and return to its cloth first.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	So that after seven days or less it is healed, for it is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you wish, take a bladder of oil and tighten it over the navel of the patient; and insert the whole bladder into the hipbone, and blow with force through the tube inside it so that the bladder is inflated within the hipbone, for the fracture returns.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	Then let it be filled with oil and let it stand for several days according to what we have told you, until it is healed completely.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the arm of the man or woman is broken, then administer the restoration and binding of it as we have recommended for the hipbone.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	This text is likely referring to the right-handedness of those who study and understand this book, as it emphasizes a certain directionality in understanding these medical treatments. As for the actual translation, I would need more context or specific sentences for an accurate translation.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	If the arm of the man is broken, remove the bridle and put the arm in that; then place it over the wrap of cloth, wrapped up, and leave it for three days or more, healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter .xxi.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	Of the Restoration of Broken Bones When They Have Begun to Putrefy.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	Convenient is to that person to whom the fracture has occurred, and more so if the bone is large, as that of the thigh or of the pelvis, or similar to that, that you keep it well and bleeds it often, if the conditions of bleeding allow you, thus as not to be in danger of death.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the plague has subsided, then know that you keep it in confinement until you powder on its leg three times, unless another cause presents itself.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And then begin to restore the fracture in that day of rest, and do not prolong it, unless you see pus.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	Unless you see pus, then leave the restoration of it until the ninth day, lest it putrefy, and do not approach it on the third day or the fourth, for you will cause a bad accident.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	If the broken bone is about to come out of its socket, then know that you shall reduce it and bring it in with your hands easily and a little extension.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	If the extension is not prepared and the balance of it with your own hands, then reduce it with this instrument; and this instrument is made of iron, its length is seven or eight fingers and its width is two, and it is necessary for the doctor to take three or four of them according to the quantity that you need to heal in total in any kind of fracture.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And be soft, and be little thick because it is not necessary to bend the compression on it at the time of the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And be sharp in its edges, and be thick towards the center, and of the thickness of it tend to the feet, and of the majority of it into the joints.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	This is how it is made:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	It is called in Greek "labra volentz atelarem", which means "soft-bound palm".
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	So that the end of it is raised above the end of the bone that is about to come out.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And wrap it in a cloth until it returns the bone, and bring it in with some kind of mold.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And then try to wrap the ends of the fracture between them, and if the end of the broken bone is small, and you do not have a good instrument, then know that you must cut the end of that bone with an instrument.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	If you cannot reduce the bone at all with that which we have described, then cut it with an instrument that cuts well, or break it with one of the hands.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	Then remove what remains in the bone of small scrapes and cuts.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone has been reduced, and the pain of the patient is very intense, know that the bone has not returned to its natural position; and at that time treat the patient with great care.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	Once your restoration is complete and you wrap it in black cotton cloth, especially if it is summer, and do not place anything on the wound or cause any friction, lest it cause corruption and decay.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And then administer the medicine of the completion of the bone's restoration, and leave the wound uncovered in order to cut it with scissors and use wraps according to the quantity of the plague.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And guard it with great care that you do not increase the plague with the fracture, for useless and unhealthy methods cause death or bad health, and it heals badly.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if the patient's compression is loose, soft, different from the compression of other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	If the plague is great or is a bad plague that you are afraid of may happen to it, and you feel pain in its location, then know that you do not place anything on it, but wrap it in tough cloth instead of blankets, and strengthen it with iron.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And when a day or two after the plague begins to appear, that it may be born, then you remove the cloth from it which you had placed on it with a cloth of our custom to treat plagues, thus with four-fold medicine and similar to that.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	Know that you should remove the joint and consider the plague in every day and night until it is hardened, and know that the member should be prepared in such a way that the decay runs from it to the joints easily.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If the plague has passed a few days, and it is neither hardened nor separated from the joint, then know that there are only a few things to do, and if you keep the patient away from these things, the plague will heal quickly.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	Of those that heal slowly and do not separate, those that do not separate and place the member, causing pain, then know that you can cut them in this way: if it is possible for you to cut it.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	If the plague has become bitter or rotten, then know that you should pause a few days from those things which I have described to heal it; and if you need anything more, read the following chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o .xxx.; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And about this one in which you can speak your mind and present your request: if the foot is broken, apply to it with the arm of the coiled cow and similar to those of the large members, and do not trust too much on it, nor take it out too soon; because death may come suddenly through it. Leave it inside that it may heal well, for a strong hand breaks easily. And then treat the plague if you see it, and if not, leave it alone.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter .xx.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	Of the treatment of a sore that occurs in the trace of some fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	This sore occurs in the trace of a healed fracture, and more so if it is near the joints, and it is recognized by the shape of the member; and it is very firm that you do not operate its natural movement.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Then consider whether the sore is new and administer those medicines that have stimulated it, and then wipe, and sniff it, and try it with your fingers, and if you feel pain take some or all of them, and wrap them in cloth for a good compression.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	Then leave that member alone for a few days; and then remove it and repeat the operation, unless you feel pain, because lead has the property of inflating all that is inflated in the members.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If the sore has already become a bad one and causes pain, then know that you must cut it by a wide incision, and then remove what is excess and prominent, and if you feel pain, stop; and heal that which needs to be healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter  .xxi.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	Of the Restoration of Fractures When Restored, and then return the member to its natural state.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture is healed, and the limb is still swollen and tender, there are several possible causes: one is excessive use of the joint and the resulting lack of mobility; or, due to strictness of the joints which blocks the flow of food to the limb; or, due to an abundance of useless grease; or, due to excessive movement at the wrong time; or, due to a lack of blood in the body and its circulation.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	And treatment for him is to have him eat and make his heart strong before the disease multiplies in him; and give him baths; and put on a girdle and light.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	Then pause pressure on the limb so that the pressure brings food to him, or continuous moisture from him, so that the food flows and returns to its natural form.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter.XXII.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	Of the cure of broken bones, when they are restored by twisting and the operation of them is prohibited from him when it covers.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When the already restored limb happens to be deformed and to have a knotted shape, and it is due to the limb's lack of its usual function; however, the limb does not prohibit its natural operation, then do not take the words of one who exists that such a limb was newly knotted.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	However, there are already some foolish medicines and restorative remedies that have been done to him in our land; and this operation is very evil, losing the sign of which is deadly.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	However, if the claudication and nodulation are recent, then they should be moistened with water in which herbs that soften them are boiled; as well as leaves of arnica and yarrow, and similar things to those; or, if it is a paste of soft herbs, well-prepared, or if it is a poultice made with the broth of garlic, and applied with it; or, if grass-fat figues are boiled and triturated, and applied with fennel seed; or, if they are fresh figues that are boiled and triturated, and applied to them.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And some times it is dissolved with slow friction that is moistened and applied to the most wet, and is administered limb motion at all times.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	However, if the twisting has already begun at the front and is strong, and it becomes a problem and causes the need for treatment with iron; then do not take the words of one who exists that such a limb was newly twisted. However, if it is twisted slightly at the front and is no longer twisted; then take care to remove all excess of nodulation from that limb using very fine instruments, and administer it with ease and attention.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter.XXXIII.
De sermo en dislocacio.	Of talking in dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is very much of one of the joints of the limb, by which it is prohibited from moving, and the shape of the limb is changed, and great pain and damage comes to the patient.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore, when you happen to have a dislocation, then immediately cut it so that it is reduced, and do not delay reducing it; because if it is delayed, the limb becomes putrefied and difficult for it to be reduced.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And therefore do not stand or sit up during the apotheosis; because visible muscles bring about spasms and pains in the body.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	However, when it happens to you, then take care that you hide the limb from the flabotomy, and allow it to rest until the apotheosis has passed; and take care that the limb is moistened with water and oil, and reduced with ease.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And the whole limb be cured with water from which the memory will come back to its place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And I have already ordered the chapters on dislocation according to which follows a fracture; from the upper part of the body to the lower part.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter.XXIV.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	Of the cure of dislocation of the jaw.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	So dislocated the two jaws if they are not tensed by little movement, and are slightly softened; or so dislocated by entire dislocation and complete, so that they are softened at the joint's start, before the saliva leaves the patient's mouth, and his tongue is wrapped in its words.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	However, when the dislocation of him is little, then in most cases it returns by itself because there is a little cause.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	However, if the dislocation is entire and complete, then it should be reduced slowly, and not delayed at all.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And it is that the minister has the head of the patient, and inserts it in the mouth of him at the part where the dislocation is inside the mouth, if the dislocation is from one side; or he inserts the two sides together, if the dislocation is from both sides, and the others are outside where they belong; and orders the patient to cease his jaw and perform those motions that can; and he wraps the jaw and ties it up, so that it returns to its place.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if the reduction of him is difficult, and more so if both of the jaws are completely dislocated, then administer vaporization with water and oil; so that the reduction of both is easy, and do not delay reducing both at all, for I have already said.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And therefore, when you return and are wrapped up, and the mouth of the patient is closed and not softened, then pause on those dusts of cloth with a cotton ball, and make it with wax and rosin; and do so with ease on soft limbs.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And let the patient sleep on his two sides, and his head be between two pillows, so that he does not sniffle on either side; and do not force him to drink anything; and have his food be forbidden meat, so that when the pains return and the jaws are locked, then sniffle what you want.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And let it be administered with ease, and do not work on the appearance of the mouth while eating or drinking or speaking; so that the jaw is locked and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if the reduction of two jaws is difficult when they are dislocated at any time and not reduced to their places, then immediately take care that visible muscles appear; and great pain and a sudden fever come, and strongly contract the abdomen of the patient, and suddenly vomit pure blood.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you see this, then know that it is a waste of time; and take note of the days when it happens to him.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter.XXV.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	Of reducing the dislocation of the fibula and the end of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The fibula is not dislocated from the leg' end because of its continuity with the foot; and some times it is dislocated from the front, and then pain is felt.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And the restoration of him is that the patient plays with his two sides and spreads his arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	Then tighten the joint with your hand with a firm tightening, because it will return.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	Then pause over that paste and dusts, and strengthen it.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	However, the end of that which secures it and is continuous with it, is never dislocated in any day; then should be reduced and wrapped up according to what I have said, and according to your custom.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And place it on that plaster, and powder, and tighten up, and order the patient to remain calm and quiet until it is healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And this injection cure reduces the extremity of the muscle when it is separated from its place.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter .xxvi.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	On the Reduction of Muscular Dislocation.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	Know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, one of which is that it is dislocated from the starting point of the tendine to the starting point of the tendon.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is that it is dislocated from the starting point of the muscle, and then it comes off; and it is not dislocated from the back through the shoulder, nor from the front through the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And mostly it is dislocated and comes off from the starting point of the tendine on the sides, and mostly in those who are thin-skinned, it comes off with difficulty; but in those where there is much flesh, it is easily dislocated.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And a strong blow happens to certain men by percussion or impact, and the muscle of them is torn from tore, and is recognized by the one who has already been dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Then tell me that you are not sure about this because you were on top of him, and then proceed with the cure for him.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And the dislocation of it is recognized when it is on the sides away from the tendon; so that you distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the other, because you can tell them apart very clearly; and you touch the back of the muscle with your finger, so that a sound comes out like a whistle, and the patient cannot reduce his hand to his ear, nor make that movement.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is dislocated from below or above, and you feel a clear touch, and it does not hide itself.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And of this dislocation there is a little reduction when it is fresh and the patient is a child.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction of it is that the minister raises the hand to its starting point; and he places the strings on either side of the tendon, and raises the joint with strength at its place, and the minister raises the hand, and extends it in front of him; and then he places those on either side because it returns with difficulty.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	But if by this water it does not return, and only from the beginning that the dislocation has happened, then when the patient is bathed in warm water and massaged with liniments so that they become soft and smooth as if their hair were cut with a razor, and fenugrec and melilot are added to the water, and it is administered.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	Then the patient is to be put on his back and held in position with a strap that goes from his shoulder to his hip, waiting for the hair to grow between the tension and tightness, and then the doctor places his foot on the spine, and raises the joint with strength, and the minister holds the patient's head so that it does not move towards the sides, because that moment returns to its place.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you want, reduce this second way: and it is that you have another man present who is longer than the patient, and he stands on the side of him, and inserts his hand under the tendon from behind, and raises the tendon of the patient up to its starting point while the patient is suspended in the air, and another minister holds the patient's head so that it does not turn towards the sides, for thus the patient returns to its place.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	But if the patient is very ill, then when you know that another cause is responsible for his suspension, so that this one returns because the dislocation comes back quickly.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And it is reduced and another way: that a long pole with a round top, like a staff of mortar, that is neither too thick nor too thin, is placed behind the patient; because it is placed on the top of the staff, and the patient stands according to its length, and his hands are extended towards the sides with strength, because the joint returns to its place quickly.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if the reduction of it is difficult for all the reasons we have mentioned, then use this cure: and that you take a pole whose length is equal to two arms, and whose height is four times the distance between the shoulder and the elbow, and whose thickness is reduced at the top of the tendon according to this figure:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And then place it on the top with a round staff, like a staff of leather, so that the pole does not slip from the patient's hand.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And then the staff is placed behind the tendon of the patient, and the hand or arm is extended towards the sides with strength, until it reaches the starting point, and the staff is held tight by the assistant and the arm and the tip of the hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	And then the arm is placed on a step according to its height, and the hand is extended towards the sides, and the other side is suspended from the other part, because the joint returns quickly.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the instrument is completed according to each of your possible methods, and you pause behind the tendon with a rope that reaches from one shoulder to the other, then apply a prepared paste made of powder of molasses and egg white on all the muscle, so that it is turned upside down, and then tighten it with a strap below the tendon with tension; and let the ligament be turned over the paste, and the hand be connected to the neck, and be left like this, and not be held by the hand for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And when the patient's food is stopped briefly, until his member is comfortable, because it is better to wait for its recovery.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And then the food should be given every seven days or more, and exercise be made with the movement; and if it stops being soft and does not become so again, then it has healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	But if the joint is dislocated with visible moisture that occurs on it or for some other reason, then when cauterization is performed in front of it according to what is said in the chapter on cauterization.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if all this does not heal and the ligament is loose on it after seven days, then you know that its nerves are cut or extended or softened, and you know that the joint will never return to its place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	And from the dislocation of that which is done from below or above, the reduction is made with a sudden movement and extension to its maximum, while it returns.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And let that other tension be administered, and let that cure be given until it is healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if the recovery of the patient is delayed and there is little movement in his limb, then the patient uses water with visible moisture until that gravity is removed from him and he returns to his natural state first.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter xxvi.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	On the Cure of Muscular Dislocation.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	Know that the joint of the shoulder is dislocated with great difficulty and seems to return with the same difficulty; and it is dislocated from all sides, mainly from the front to the back, and the dislocation of it is not hidden when you adjust the dislocated one to its place, and then you declare it clearly because the joint is rounded and cannot bend the arm or touch with its hand according to some shape.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And when these cushions are put in place and the dislocation is reduced so far forward that it reaches the patient's chest, for if it reaches the patient's chest, reducing it is difficult, and it does not heal completely; and more so when it is at the back, because it is worse than all other types of dislocation and causes great pain and many blisters should be put on to prevent death.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And the restoration of it, when it is that which can be reduced, is that the hand of it is extended to two times more, and the arms of it are spread out, and the sides of the body are placed on the cushion and leave it, and he presses the joint with its fingers or with the palm of his hand until it returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	But if the dislocation is at the front, then return it like this that he doubles his hand with his own hand, until he strikes the knee with his palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not obey to the reduction, then administer violent beating and very strong.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And it is that two ministers extend their arms, and hold this support for him two ministers so that he does not be shaken by the beating.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	Then return it like this that is wrapped a long folded cloth around his hand, or else.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the patient touches the joint with his hand, oil it with some oil so that those causes which help in lubrication of the joint with ease; and then press the joint with a violent push until it returns.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	And the reduction of it, when it is placed on that cushion in which there is stinging and excision with alum of lead, and it is extended with a stricture downward, and the arm is suspended from the neck, and it is left for some days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	Then untie it; and if the joint is formed in its place, then untie the cloth from it and leave that one.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see that the joint is not strong, then untie that cloth and tie it again, and leave that one for some days until it is dried up; and then untie it.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	But if gravity occurs to it in the reduction of the joint, and its disposition is in movement, then administer humidification in a bath and gentle friction and compression, until it is relieved; or pause over the joint that is relaxed, so it is covered with a thick cloth; and then tie it, and leave that one on the bone for a day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	Then untie that one, and put it in a bath; and when it is relaxed, then you rub the joint with gentle friction, and then repeat over that one that is relaxed, so it makes noise of movement, once, twice, and third time,
corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denolam intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	The corruption has already come about on the skin of the body through the bath water, so that it is not limited.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you want, pause over that wound of cow that is wet and scraped with the border and press on it; and make several strokes, because that one is wet and reduces its disposition.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	Of treatment of a dislocation that is in the shoulder, if it is at the joint that is between the arm and the hand.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	A dislocation of the hand has been moved, and the reduction of this dislocation is slight, and the opposite is true for other joints; but nevertheless, when it occurs that a dislocation is at the shoulder, then the reduction of it is quickly, before the place where it occurred reaches an apoplectism or if it occurs in an apoplectism.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	The reduction of the dislocation is that you stop the joint of the hand of the patient on a table and the minister extends the hand of it, and the patient stops his side or his palm over the edge of the joint, and presses it until it returns to its place.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	But nevertheless, when the palm is already shown to the belly of the hand, then the patient stops the two sides of his hand on a table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is previous, then stop the two sides of the hand, then place the hand of it intricately on the table, so that the side of the body covers that edge of the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And if it returns quickly, then that is good; and if not, then return it with a cloth that gives an apoplectism and leave it; and do not repeat that, because there does not suffer nor can about the reduction of it for more than days.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	But nevertheless, the joint is second to its tortuosity; and there does not appear to the patient any cause, but the hand becomes soft and cannot be strong for any cause; then you know that the nerves are thin or many, and then it is not suitable to put a strong cautery on it at the bottom of it, because it can give some cause.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	Then when the hand has returned to health, then return it on that cloth which you have re-covered, and leave it and strengthen it for five days; and then untie it and exercise the hand.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	But if the movement of it is still and occurs in it some gravity, then untie that one with a tail of water and several strokes, until it is relieved.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	Of treatment of a dislocation in the fingers.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Some strokes are dislocated from the beginning.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when any finger is dislocated from the two sides of the palm or the belly of it, then press the joint and press its ends together, until it returns.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	Then support the tip of the finger, and suspend that one from the part to which it is dislocated, and leave that one for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	Then hang that one up and extend that one within that day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when night comes, then hang that one again according to that description, and do not stop untying that one during the day and exercising its movement, then hang that one at night; and make it straigh for several days.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And do the same to the patient, if it is dislocated at the belly of the hand, and hang that one from the side to which it is dislocated, and make the first operation of that one, until it heals.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And in the same way, do to the patient if it is dislocated at the other sides.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter 30.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	Of treatment of a dislocation in the spine of the back.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	And when it occurs in any of the vertebrae of the back or neck, and if some vertebrae do not move, then that is a complete dislocation; and if death comes to the patient, then put a pillow under him.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	And the sign of that one is that the vomit of the patient comes out without will; and it cannot hold those; and some members of its body or two sides of its clothes, or both of its clothes, or two bras of its body, or one of them; or if a vertebra moves from its place, because that sign appears and that sign appears.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Then that one is already re-moved to the back sides and is called gibletness.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	But the treatment of it is that you consider if gibletness comes from a child, because then there is no cure or healing for all.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	But in that one that is dislocated by chance or by beating or similar to those, the old doctors have said many ways of treatment, some of which return with profit; and I have seen that one with which they are less profit, because it is near to my ear due to its nearness to my mouth; and with this I have heard and formed a different instrument from that with which I will show you and expand it.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And I say that in the case of the pain that occurs at the front of the foot, it is not useful or healing for this; and similar to that which happens when it is made to two legs.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And those are not cured except where it occurs in the two correctly as I have recommended it.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And the patient is extended on his face on a bed near the wall, and extended underneath him a moist instrument so that his feet are not touched.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	Then a stick is placed upright, fixed to the ground at the end of the foot around the head of the patient, and another stick is raised between the feet on the other side.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	And the minister holds the stick, and does not place it in a pit; and another minister holds the other according to that form.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And wrap the head of the patient and leave the latters to tickle his head hard; and extend the end of the latters to the stick that is meant for his head, and lay this on him; and approach the other latters and tighten them around his hips, leaving his legs uncovered, and adjust all the latters and lay these on the other stick that is meant for his feet.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And the minister drops the stick at the front of the two sticks and the latters that are meant for his limbs in their places, however, they are not tied in this way as I have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the doctor places his palms on his spine with strength until he returns or puts them on a table, and approaches him to adjust his feet on the table before he returns.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	But if he does not return in this way, then take a table whose height or length is in a line with three brasas, and dig into the wall where I have said that the patient should be placed a place in which the end of the table meets.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And place the middle of the table on his spine, and the doctor places his feet on the other end, and adjust it well so that the spine is pinched and he returns to his place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you want to, open the door that is rolled with your hand; and it is that you are on the ground the head of the patient at the back of the foot two sticks, the length of which is one braza, and the head of the patient at the back of the foot only two sticks; and let the length be between each stick a palm, and it has already been made in each stick through which the ball runs, and each is stopped on the ground so that it does not move.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And be a round stick in which the door is opened, and let it be rolled in the two turns of the two sticks.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at the end of him is a turn in which the stick is formed, whose length is a palm to that it is rolled; and similar are the other two sticks.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And tighten the latters that you have placed on the feet of the patient in the turn that is meant for his head, and the latters that you have placed on the hips of the patient in the door that is meant for his feet.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And approach each door and place a minister who twists the door with his hand, and the doctor pinches his spine as I have said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	This is the form of the door:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And when the spine has returned and its place is taken, then cover with a dry alumen, and wrap; and approach to put it on a table whose height is a third of six or around that quantity, and its length be the amount that takes up the space of the gelbosity, and at the front of the spine.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And let it be tied with the latters that I have said, and use the patient's food subtly as healing.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if there is any urgency in the place at the end of the healing, then cover to be administered medicines that soften and smoothen for the administration of the table over a long time, which I have recommended; and it has been administered at that place lead of lead.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And in some cases an imminence occurs at the back of the two spines, and it is detected by that dislocation; and this is the bone from which you have already noticed because it does not cover that he should be made to take this medicine, for it will be very difficult for him to die.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	Of the treatment of a dislocated hip.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	You should know that the joint of the thigh and the joint of the muscle do not come except by dislocation, and that it does not happen to those that happen to the other joints with little movement and concavity.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the joint of the thigh is dislocated in four ways, because it is dislocated on the inside, or on the outside, or in front, or behind.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And most commonly it is dislocated on the inside, and less in front or behind.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	And the sign of the dislocation of him to the inside is four, when you adjust the curvature of the patient with his back to the spine, it becomes longer and its back more curved than that of a healthy person, and the patient cannot bend his tongue because it is broken; and this is the place where the tongue is broken by a break.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	And the sign of that which happens to him in dislocation is to the outside, because the accidents of him are opposite to this accident.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	And the sign of that which happens to him in dislocation to the front is four, however it does not bend that way because of the pain that it causes; and if it goes out through the front, his urine is held back and his tongue is broken, and he should walk on a stick.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	And the sign of that which happens to him in dislocation to the back is that it does not spread out his back, nor can he bend his tongue forward because it bends his tongue; and his curvature is shorter than that, and his tongue is softened, and this is the place of the tongue.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	However, the reduction of these spices in this dislocation is that you consider, then, if the dislocation is old and ancient, it has already been noticed because it was made to take a reduction from him, and if it is not in that cure of all; and therefore it does not cover that he should be made to take this reduction.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	However, in that which the dislocation is recent, and it is one of the four species of dislocation, then you should set the joint back to its place and extend it on the inside and outside, and turn it towards the right and left, for a strong person returns and does not need any other cure.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	However, if it does not return in this way, then cover that you prepare a minister strong and extend the back of the patient from the side where it is closest, or on his back, or with a lanyard that is tied around his back; and another minister extends the hand of the patient from behind his head, so that his feet are not touched; and tie the other lanyard to the foot of the patient.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And let it be extended from him or from the inside to the tongue at the back of the jaw, or from the back to the tongue at the front of the throat.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And let all these be extended in one way so that the patient is raised to his side on a table, and let it hang hanging.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	And this type of expansion is similar to all four.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And therefore if the dislocation returns as we have said, it is good; and otherwise, it is necessary for all kinds of water that I say about their own cure.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of him himself, when dislocated, and the dislocation is to the inside, cover that the patient is raised over his own side; and approach the ligaments on the ridge of the crotch at this place which lies between the head of the crotch and the place where the tongue is left; and extend the ligament in its part of the leg on the uppermost part of the femur.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And another minister takes hold of the legs with great power, and rubs the thick part of the crotch with violent expansion; because that returns to its place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this type is the most difficult cure for this member is reduced, than for other types of treatment.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	But if it is lifted up by you and does not obey the entrance into this type of treatment of all, then consider that the two feet of the patient are tied together with a strong ligature; soft, gentle, on both toes and both heels.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And the length of each one of them by the quantity of four said, and the crotch is extended more than the other by a quantity of two said.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And the crotch is suspended above the top of the post, and it is on the greatest; and the length of him is from the ground a quantity of two feet.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And another young man takes hold of the head of the crotch and it is suspended on him himself with a strong strap; because the joint returns to its place by speed.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	But in the reduction of him himself, when dislocated to the outside, consider that the patient watches his own foot according to what we have said by taking off his shoes and socks; and be strong the ligament on the crotch itself and on the feet.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And two posts are placed, the one on the feet of him himself and the other on his head; and two posts are adjusted in the middle of the foot where the drape is wrapped over it, so that the patient is not dampened by the post being between the thighs of him himself, otherwise the expansion to the outside will be pulled.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And each minister extends in its part, and the doctor with his hand embraces the reduction according to the art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Therefore, if you obey in reverse, it will be good greatly; and otherwise, pause carefully on that place and then so as we have said in taking off your shoes and socks by that embrace.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	But consider that the patient watches his own side with quietness.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is to the front, consider that the crotch is extended gently, and it is according to this narration about a post; and the doctor pauses his right palm on the crotch of him himself, and approaches that place with the other hand, and at that corner extends that which is placed on both sides to the outside.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	And if the dislocation is to the back, then consider that the crotch is extended to the outside, and it is lifted up from the ground; because he is placed on a hard surface, so that when the width of him is dislocated to the inside, according to what we have said about his expansion between two widths, and its sides are extended, as we have said, there is no resistance.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And consider that the compression is applied to a table on the place where the joint is located.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Therefore, when the reduction is completed as you said— and the symbol of the reduction of him himself does not retreat to you, and it is that you extend two crotches for him, and when you see those crotches and he extends his own crotch by a band like that it is not broken in either of the sides; then you tie him up on rest for three days or four.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	And then release the ligament and the bandage, and compare one crotch with the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	And then, if you see those crotches in a vestment, then you know that the dislocation is already stopped, and let him go.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any sign of softening, then you return and bandage that one again, and extend it according to your first extension, and let him rest for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	And then release that one, and make that one walk a little bit every day until it is comfortable again.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter LXXII.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	Of Treatment of Dislocation from the Bottom.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The bottom is dislocated according to three ways, because it is dislocated to the outside, and to the inside, and to the outside at the back; and it is not dislocated to the front.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the symbol of dislocation for him himself is that you command the crotch to apply its own crotch; then you know that the bottom is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of all his ways is that you take hold of him with your right hand, and then consider that he has already extended his own crotch, if he can on it; attach the two ties to his face, and pause his feet between the ties; and another minister extends his legs between the ties over his back with strength, and another minister attaches his feet to your palms, and those between the ties on his heels with strength, and another minister raises his legs up until the bottom returns to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And the symbol of recovery for him is that his crotch adheres to the crotch with a light, gentle movement.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then bandage that one and attach his crotch to the crotch, and then tie those ties on a band with a light band for three days or four, and then release those ties.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not use the crotch for walking for some days, until it is healed and comfortable again.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	But if the reduction of him to you is justified, then consider that I will administer a strong expansion for those ligaments in the treatment of the post.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter LXXIII.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	Of Treatment of Dislocation from the Top.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The top is sometimes relieved by a little removal, and sometimes it is dislocated according to the complement, and its dislocation is caused or to the inside or to the outside.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the symbol of dislocation for him is that he deflates at the place where he is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	And the treatment of his removal is of gentle recovery, and it is that he is extended with ease until his place and is enclosed so that he returns to his place.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	And in the treatment of him when he is dislocated according to the complement, consider that you take hold of him with your right hand, and have another minister who is strong and capable at his back in the middle position of him himself.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	And then turn yourself to me with your right palm on the top of the highest part, and with your left hand on the lowest part of the foot in its position.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	And then throw his feet to you with your right palm, and then with your left hand for two times, and then extend them with your left hand; and bandage the feet with your right hand while his legs are working under the band.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And make him walk two times according to what we have said.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And bring the feet of the foot to the third bed, and you are on the mat.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	So return in one or two veiled like this way, and if the foot is covered, it is good; and if not, then do the operation again over him, because he returns.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	But if to you it is forbidden to reduce him thus that we have mentioned, then make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and put a sheet over him, and wrap him in clothes, and you will see.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	And the minister of him has his knees, and another minister extends the foot on its feet or lightly on the hip; and another minister extends that against the extension of his side, and the cushion is extended between the thighs of the patient to hold it so that its back is not pulled at the joints.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And the doctor holds the dislocation with his feet, and another minister holds the sound knee at the joint, because the dislocation comes easily.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And now that the dislocation returns and is declared to you the health of the reduction of him, then pause and apply oil strongly, and bind the foot to the bed.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And watch out for or protect the nerves that are behind on the tibia, so that the joint over it is not violent and tears it strongly.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	Then let him lie for two days or three; and if the joint has softened, then apply oil to him.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	And after that time, then wash him with water on the third day, and forbid the patient to move for ten days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	But if it is necessary to move forward that space, it is not safe that the dislocation is over him dissolved and corrupted, and then apply oil so that he does not receive treatment.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	But if it happens to him that the poultice is hot, then watch out for you to apply on his body water in which we preceded in our narration, in another place of treatment and ointment, until it is cool again.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	Of treatment for the dislocation of the toes.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	But if the one who is dislocated is covered with a little oil, it will work better; and that which is not difficult, advance slowly.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	But if the dislocation is in a certain number of toes of the foot, then watch out that you make a cut on his body over the ground or table, and let him go like this; and let him walk thus.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	And then you stand on your feet, and pause the big foot over it that is under the joints, and then step on him with your big toe carefully so that he returns, and you see if it is covered and not in the prominent place.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	And then pause the belly of the foot on a table that takes all of it, which are two heads, and then tighten him well and firmly for three days; and then wash him and let him rest from walking for ten days, until he is healed and his recovery is assured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	Of the species of dislocation that are caused by plague or fracture or any combination.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When such a cause happens to you, and you are engaged in the treatment of that person and in the recovery of him, watch out for the following things:
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And by the foot do not presume over the treatment of him, but that which is skilled in the art, long-suffering, merciful and compassionate, tardy, not impatient nor proud; and that uses in the beginning of medicine that soft poultices so much only, and lets the patient to the divine judgment, but you hope for salvation from destruction, with the alleviation of evil, and in which there appears some hope.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And then try to make him well as soon as possible from the beginning of the cause, before he develops a poultice of caustic.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And then if the member returns as soon as possible, then administer to him that soft poultice that heals the plague with water that you give him of the herbs drying.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if the dislocation is from a fracture and you hit the bones that are separated, then you strike them with your staff, and do in him so that he does not have simple pain of him who has preceded in the places of those.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And protect and avoid according to your ability that instrument in the paths of fear according to which you have preceded my proclamation; for it is better to you devotes the Creator, and remains permanent in your glory, and salutes the true face of him who is in the true time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Thus ends the words of Al-Bucasımi clearly explaining the reasons for which God did not want to be worshiped.
Amen.	Amen.
