Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Thus begins the words of Al-Bucasi .
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	O son, I give you this book, which is the last of the science of medicine, to its completion by its consequences, and for its explanations, and for its clarifications, I see that I have pleased you with this treatise, which is part of the work of hand, that is, surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	Since the work of hand is laid down in our region and in our times entirely deprived, so great perils the science of it, and its evidence remains; and they did not come from it except a few small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which changed them to error and confusion within that they are closed the doctrines of it and is extended the force of it and the art.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And it is seen to me that I have revived that in the order of this treatise in that second way of explanation and declaration and abbreviation; and so that it comes by addition of the declaration, and by preparation, which cause is necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	May the cause why a good craftsman does not excel at his work in this our time, is that the art of medicine is long, and that he has to be exercised in the science of anatomy which connects Guaria within that it knows the movements of the limbs and the shapes of them, and the connection and separation of their; and had the consciousness of the bones, nerves, and ligaments, and the name of those, and the grace of them; and of the pulsating veins and the quiet ones, and the places of emission of them.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And therefore say I that a certain word is called a monkey, less in the work small, and more in the art of hand.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	May we have already said in the entrance of this book; for who does not know that I have told you about anatomy, it is not evaded that does not fall into error by which men die, so therefore I see many of them, because some are formed in this science and get themselves of that science, and those experiments.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	For I saw a doctor of medicine and tried to see that he had made an ulcerous abscess on the neck of a woman, and had cut some arteries of the neck so that blood flowed out from it, but the woman died among its most.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And I saw another doctor who said that he would drink a pill from a man which had passed in his state, and the pill was large, and came to him and dried up that pill with a piece of the bladder, so that that man died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And I have called to be drawn out that, and I saw that because of the size of the pill and the disposition of the patient knew that he would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And I saw another doctor who took a salary from our lord of his territory by surgery, and went to a black cast that was his fracture in the crotch; and prepared the doctor, drew out the fracture, on the skin, with powder and needles with strong stretching, and did not leave it on the skin breath.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	Then he removed it according to his desires, and then he prayed, and then he left by some days and commanded that we remove the ligament; and so it came in that the crotch and the foot hole ulcerated, and came to ruin.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And I was called to it, and prepared myself to remove the ligament, and achieved peace and no longer feel his pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	May however the corruption had been confirmed in the member, so that I could not restrain it, and did not cease to walk the corruption in the member within that the patient was in danger.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And I saw another doctor who pierced a cancerous ulcer, and came to burst after some days, within that the evil of it came out on its lord.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	That is because the cancerous wound is pure of melancholic humor, then it does not cover that it comes to him by all means, but that it be a member which you suffer that of all is host.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And therefore, son, it is necessary that you consider the operation of hand to be divided into two sections: one in the work which is associated with health, and the other in the work in which there is danger in its most dispositions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And I have already exhausted it here in all places of this book where victory operation is the error and the fear; so that it is necessary for you to keep it and to leave it, so that the pages do not rob the way to speak and to disappoint you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And therefore take your arms with diligence and protection of God, and your evils with kindness and firmness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And you use the best way by the grace of God to get to salvation and to praise glorious succession, and leave behind the terrible evils of difficult healing, and keep your weapons from here that you make fear, so that you hesitate in your faith and in your name do not you run away: for it is left to your glory, and more in heaven and behind your sanctities.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Guaria has said in some of its instructions:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	"Do not treat bad disease, so that you do not know how to treat it."
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And I have divided this book according to three chapters:
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	The beginning of the division of the book, and first of the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter ordered in heads, within the feet, in the forms of instruments and tools of cauteries, and from that it is necessary in the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter, of cutting and perforating, and of vacuums, and of plagues, and of extraction of arrows and similar to those, completely ordered and arranged according to the forms of instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	The division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, of restoration and dislocation, and cure of torメントo and similar to those; chapter ordered in heads within the feet, and of the forms of instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	Of fire cauterizing and acute medicine and recollection of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	In that way begins the treatise of all the book.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	That I say the quality of the movements of that cauterizing and of the elements of it, and in which combination is prohibited cauterizing.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	So I say that the speech of the quality of the movement of cauterizing and of the element of it is long and prolix, and subtle by science, and hidden. And already from him to speak a great many of wisdoms, and disagree with them, and enough for me a little of their speeches, in fear of lengthiness.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And so I say that cauterizing confers on all universal combination, which is of one matter or another, except two combinations, which are combination of the tail of the first matter.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the combination of the tail and the dry matter will disagree; for some say that cauterizing is helpful to it, and others say the opposite, that cauterizing is not convenient in a disease which is by quality and by dryness, because the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and is not convenient that the dry and the tail are cured.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And he says that who says the opposite, that by cauterizing is cured in all dry and tail disease which comes to the bodies of men, for when you compare the bodies of men with the moisture of them to the combination of fire, it strikes out the bodies of men as if they were dried.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I say by the speech of that, which has experienced here at some times to discover.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	Now therefore I have learned that such a person does not come on this one who is already exhausted and exercised in the chapter of cauterization by the latter exercise, and has known the diversity of the constitution of men and the disposition of the diseases in their metheguses, and the causes of those, and the accidents of them, and the space of time of those.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	In other complexions, however, you have nothing to fear, and most certainly in wet and hot diseases, for all the doctors are agreed on those, and are not disagreeing in the cauterization of them at the beginning.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And know, children, that of the secret of cure by cauterization with fire and of the goodness of it, is that the fire is simple, the action of which does not reach except to the member which is cauterized and does not hurt the other member to which it is applied except with a little injury.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	The action of burning medicine reaches to that in the member which is blistered, and strongly brings about the coming of the disease in the member which is difficult to cure, and strongly annoys it.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	The fire, for its sublety and for the goodness of its substance, does not do harm except that it is superfluous; And I am already acquainted with it by experience and by long service in studying the art on the truth of causes; and by this fire, and the quality of the operation of it in the bodies and their expansion through which they expel the diseases, demonstrated by philosophical argument, which would be more acute in your ears if I did not restrain myself from speaking for fear of being too long.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And know, children, that they disagree as to the time when it is convenient to make cauterization and pause the best time of spring.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And I say that cauterization is convenient at all times, so that the injury by the time of accident is immersed in the joy of him who has the cauterization imposed on him, and more so if the cauterization is for pains or necessary pains, which do not suffer delay, since those which come with malice, which are greater than a little injury, enter by time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And therefore do not be taken in by popular opinion or foolish physicians; for it is that those who are cured by cauterization are not recovered every time, and pause at the consequence of that.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the cause is not to be feared then as it is believed by some people because cauterization is only a place of medicine which alters the constitution and dries up the humors which are the cause for which pains come.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	But therefore, excessive cauterization over medicine because of the want of its virtue and the goodness of its operation and the greatness of its lord.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	It is possible that the disease return at any time of the year, according to the constitution of the patient and the location of his disease, and the virtue of it; and because it is prepared in his body by the addition of the superfluities in it, and because it has been brought to him in its acquisition with food and things resembling those causes; but if the disease to which cauterization was applied is a subtle one in some member of few superfluities and humors, then, when cauterized for pain and similar to that, it may be possible that in his body it does not return that pain, but comes elsewhere.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	And yet a popular saying is that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine, and one which is applied to those who understand it not, for I believe that it is no cure which profited from medicine or from any other cause by applying cauterization.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the cause is contrary to that; and I understand that cauterization is the last resort of medicine when we apply cure-all methods in some diseases, and those medicines do not benefit them, but at the end of the cause we administer fire to him, and it profited to that one.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And therefore I understand that cauterization is the last resort of medicine, not according to the saying which is understood by the popular opinion and the foolish physicians.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And they say that fire applied to gold is better than fire applied to iron, and do not say this except for the equaling of the gold and the sublety of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they say that the place of cauterization does not cause blisters, and do not say this except for the equaling of gold and its sublety; for I have seen and touched it so that it is not absolutely virtuous, because you are making fire burn gold, and it is not known to you whether you will make it brash or not, for it has been prepared to receive it. And if you apply fire to burn iron thus, it does not show you; but if you apply fire to burn gold, it turns it into ashes, and the artisan who works with it does not know whether he is going to blister or no, for he prepares himself to receive him.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And therefore fire applied to iron should be done with care and in a forward manner on the right side of the operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have arranged this chapter on cauterization according to the other chapters, and I have arranged those within it in order, so that they may answer your questions about them.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	About cauterization for head pain by cold and moisture.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cauterization confers to the cold and moisture on the service accident of which there are two causes, so it is a cause of soda and many fluxes of rheumatic fever, called rhumatism, from the head to the joints of the limbs and ears flowing, and many sleeping, and toothache and the gurgle, and generally all diseases that come through cold; also, by a similar way in those diseases.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The shape of this cauterization is as follows: that first you command the patient to be evacuated by a lacative medicine, with the head uncovered, for three or four nights, according to whether you require the virtue of the patient and his age and custom.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then order him to shave his head, and then make him sit between your legs on a bench and place his hands on your feet.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then place the edge of your hand near the edge of his nose between his eyebrows.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	But therefore, when the patient has spoken of his place, mark that place with a test; and then apply fire to it, and this is the form of it:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And then make him sit on that spot with his feet bent, in such a way that his feet are forced to move from one side to the other; and you turn him.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And then raise your hand slightly and look at the spot; and if you see any quantity of hair fall from the head, or if it is cold to touch, then lower your hand again, and if it does not feel hot, turn him on another side; and if it does not feel warm, until he has felt the heat.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then take a little salt and dissolve it on the spot and let it sit there for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then make him sit in a covered place facing the wind, and let that sit there until the fire is extinguished.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the spot with a fourfold medicinal unguent until it is healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And they say that as much as the plague of Rome raged, so many were blistered, and it is better and more refreshing.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And they say that it should be cauterized on the bone, and the cauterization should be done until the part of the bone is dried up.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And let this hair be cut that it ader to the bone; and let it be cured.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And others said that I should bring the cautery to the back, so that it enters strongly into the bone, and this is the form of an epizootic little boy:
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And they estimate from that place the vapors of the head.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And let this wound be held open for a long time, and let it be cured before it is healed.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	But neither of these two kinds of cauterization has been seen by me in all of my experience; but the third, that of burning with fire, is more suitable to the head than any other, since it can be used without stopping until the wound is healed completely; and this is true of every part of the body, especially when the skin has split.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the kind of cauterization first is more saved and better I know; and from that house, and work, I know salvation.
Capitol segon.	Capitolo Second.
Del cauteri del cap.	Of the cauterization of the head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When in the whole head occurs a chronic and long pain, and water is present in the patient's head, and uses of irons and of caltks and of capipurges and of emblasters and of gualinas and of semblantz, and mainly if it has already been cauterized with one kind of cautery that they tell you and do not profit from another, consider that since the head of the patient is of a strong creation in its nature; and is not pleasant and causes great pain, then cauterize it with another kind of cautery that has not been used yet.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And let this one be cauterized on the corner of his head with a cautery, so that the cord is broken.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	And let the cord be incised and uncovered from the bone the quantity that we have told you, and cauterize it with a cautery at the back of the head in the place which is called the vas, -- and this is the place where the wind blows.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And I will be pleased with it in this way, and do not uncover the bone, for by water the head suffers a great deal of pain different from the pain of all the other types of cauterization of the head.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And this cauterization in its place, since when the cauterization is made with one kind of cautery on the corners of the head and on the occiput, it is less painful than when cauterized with another kind of cautery on the middle part of the head; and this is the form of it.
Capitol ters.	Chapter Three.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	Of cauterization of the emigre (not ancient).
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When the pain at the back of the head is hard, or is present in the feet, let the head be washed with medicine, and let another cure be administered, which I have said before in the cases of diseases; and if it does not profit from it, cauterize it with a sharp instrument, or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	Better to cauterize with medicine that you take a dolce of gold, and scrub it and burn the extremities of it from both ends.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	And let the place where the pain is located be incised on the temple with a sharp knife, so that it is in its cavity; and let the cord be covered.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	And let this be held down on it with a strong pressure for three hours; and then take the medicine away from it, and keep the wound open for two or three days, and let this be done to the skin over the place where the pain is located; and so let it be treated after a while.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And let that one be cured with ointment so that it may heal.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	If you have them, take some of the medicines that I wrote in the two treatises about burning medicines.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	Better the cauterization with iron according to this way:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	And it is called a little peg, since the head is thus shaped like a peg; and in its middle part there is a small protrusion.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	And let this be done to the place of the pain; and hold your hand so that it does not become dislocated the little peg which is left; and rotate the little iron rapidly.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the quantity of blood that is exhausted by the cord is so much as to make most of it leave the body; and raise your hand so that the artery which is left does not become dislocated, so that no flow of blood occurs.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And let the wound be bathed in salt water and let this be done to the place, and keep it open for three days; and then let the skin be dried with a towel, and let that one be cured with ointment so that it may heal.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	If you see it, cauterize it at the end of the knife according to the second kind of cauterization; and be careful not to make an incision of the artery in this emigrant (not ancient) head.
Capitol quart.	Chapter Four.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	Of cauterization of the ancient emigrant.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you treat an emigrant with the cure that I have said before, and with the cure that I have said in the divisions of diseases, and if it does not profit from the cure, and sometimes for the disease that does not respond to the cure that I have said before, either with medicine or fire; then consider that you ignite the cauterization with a knife so that it is bleached, since this means over the place of the pain in a line of length corresponding to most of it, or less than that; and hold your hand so that it does not become dislocated the little peg which is left, and rotate the little iron rapidly.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, it is necessary to you that you keep from the continuation of the jaw, which is moved by the chewing, and that the larynx does not become dislocated and the nerves which move it, and that it does not become paralyzed with a spasm.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it is about the preservation and caution of the flow of blood from the artery which is cut off, since in the cutting of it there is a danger, and mainly at that one which does not know what it is doing; and let the operation be carried out with iron at the beginning.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And I will come to the memory of the accident of the flow of blood from the artery according to your way, in your place of freedom.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	If this disease does not respond to this kind of cure, and if the wound of the patient is tolerable; then cauterize it in its middle part according to what I have told you, and treat the wound with ointment so that it may heal.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	If you see it, administer the cauterization that I have said in the chapter about stretching the artery with two knives; and this is the best kind of cauterization and most certain.
Capitol .v.	Chapter Five.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	Of cauterization of the pains in the ears.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When there is a pain in the ear that stings and is treated with the cure that I have said in the division of causes which produce it, and if the pain does not subside; then cauterize it, and this is the kind that has no specific name, and this is its form:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	And let this be done to the place of ignition, and let it be turned round in all directions; and if the pain is in either side of the ear, or in any part of it:
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	And let this be done slowly with the cauterization of the edge of the ear little by little, so as not to burn the place where the pain is located with the fire.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the cauterization leaves punctures all over the ear, and this one; then let those places be treated with ointment so that they may heal.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter Six.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	Of cauterization for burns.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	Burns which are cured and cauterized are only due to the spices that come by means of blood flow, according to what we have said in the divisions of the malignancies.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cauterization with the spice which comes out due to dryness or spasm of the nerve.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you treat that kind of burn with poultices and sudores and no cure, then you cauterize the groin with three things: first, razing the armpit, second, a small piece from the thigh, third, the junction of two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And suspend the little cauterization due to the opposite of the malignant exit, for softening does not take place except in that exit where the cure begins.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	And the form of cauterization is that you cauterize that with the cauterium on the right side of the armpit, placing a small one over the top of the head, and another in the middle, whose length is according to the length of the foot, and then take your hand off while it is being burned.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	This is the form of the cauterium, and it is especially due to the knife, the form of which is before a table.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	However, much more useful is that one little bit too often be applied to the surface; and let it be cut with a knife in place of superfluous crudeness.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	Then heal the area with water that has been preheated until it is cured.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	Of cauterization for ancient apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When ancient apoplexy has occurred and you have not given your medication and the groin does not have a fever, then cauterize that with four things: over all the corners of the head; as well as the top of the head, according to what we have said; and at the nape.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the method of cauterization is done according to what has been said.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And it has already been cauterized on the mouth of the stomach, and then later; and let it be healed with water that you have heated.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	Of cauterization for oblivion caused by dry heat.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	Then give the groin at the beginning with large poultices and small pills, whispering words of comfort.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	Then shave the whole head of the patient and place on his nape with cerates described in the treatise of cerates.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And pause for some time, for that is a way to cauterize.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	Then heat water according to the medicine already described.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And if it is a good cure, then do so; but if not, then make three things on the back of the head, which are separated from the top of the head (the part that is more at the top) to the back of the head (the part that is more behind).
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	Then leave between each cauterization a little space of the spice, and then heal the cauterization with water that has been prepared.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	But if the groin is hot and bears water, then make the cauterization in the middle; and if you have added more, then cauterize that on top of the head.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Then heal that within which is cured; and let it be an olive cauterization according to the form given.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	Of cauterization for paralysis and softening of the whole body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	Then process in the head with poultices and water as we have said; and then shave the head of the patient, and cauterize that in the middle of the head, and on all the corners, and on the back of the neck, and three things on the cervical vertebrae.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the case of softening the body due to cold weather and the malady is severe, then cauterize that with four things on the cervical vertebrae, and further, within the meaning of the neck, and hold your hand.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	Then heal that area which needs to be healed, and let it be an olive cauterization.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	Of cauterization for epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	The epileptic is not cauterized, but that epilepsy is due to blood flow.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	Then at the beginning of treatment, whips the neck of him to the right and left, and then with the other treatment that we have said in the division when the malady is severe and bears the pain of medicines.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it is a child who does not bear the medicines, then administer poultices and toffees in the mouth before water for three days, with food.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	Then shave the head of the child, and cauterize that with one cauterization in the middle of the head according to the previous method, and another on the top of the head; and on each corner of the head, make a mark with a knife.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the malady is severe and bears a fever, then cauterize that with four things: on the cervical vertebrae and the lumbar vertebrae of the back; and let it be a softening cauterization within the meaning of the neck and the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And let it be an olive cauterization according to what has gone before.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	But if the malady is in a child, then pause with a delicate cauterization according to this method.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	Of cauterization for melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humidities and dry heat, then cauterize that with the things we have said when it is due to paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is due to excess and declining towards melancholy, and the body of the patient is humid, then give him water that softens the head according to the water that has preceded in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	Then shave the head of the patient, and then make a small hole in the middle of the head, and pause that in the middle of the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And the malady is due to heat, and it has been kept for all parts.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	Then pause with an ointment; and it is more fit for a sheepskin.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And sear that over the fire by moderate heat according to what he has said when it is between him and the wind; then let him suffer when it is in the wind.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	Then leave that in the middle of the head of him in a circle, and allow him to cool down within.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	Then make water with the patient once a week, one day with water that softens the head according to what we have said; or if you wish, cauterize that by making small points according to the order of the head, this is a special kind of cauterization that moistens the brain with equalization.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	Then pause that with a red-brown ointment in the wind or in grey color.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	Of cauterization for downward water in the throat.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When you have described the beginning of water in the throat due to the signs that we have said in the division, then begin and give the patient water that softens his head, and keep back all kinds of moisture.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	Then make that taste like a bath by adding a little at a time.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	Then order him to shave his head, and cauterize that with a cauterization in the middle of the head; and then cauterize that with two things on the temples if it is the beginning of the descent of water in two places, or on one side if it is the beginning of water in a single place.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Cut all the veins and arteries that remain tied up, and let the cauterizations be made at a certain distance from the temples in length.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And keep yourself away from blood loss when cauterizing; and if there is a flow of blood, stop it with some medicine that you may have at hand.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And I come with wisdom which is in the extraction of arteries and in the exclusion of them, and be careful of blood loss.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And some veins are cauterized at the neck with two bones exposed on either side of two caustics that are burning.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	Of the cauterization of ancient tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When the tears of the eyes are ancient and thoroughly flowing through the veins and arteries that are in the prominent place of the head, let it be seen that this is a superfluity of fluid mucus; then cauterize it with a caustic that we have mentioned in the beginning of water gushing into the eyes, and cauterize it at the place of the head, and two caustics in the neck on either side of the temples, and two caustics at the neck between the two bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if you have a feverish addition, then cauterize it in the whole length of the ear at the tip of the eyebrow with a small caustic.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	Of the cauterization of a foul smell from the nose.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you medicate it with water that we have mentioned in the division and do not profit from your medication, then prepare and give the patient three nights' worth of liquid medicine; and then shave his head, and cauterize it halfway with a caustic that is slightly bitter.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	Then cauterize it with a nail caustic on either side of the eyebrows, leaving a little hair.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And keep yourself away from the fire so that it does not burn those.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	This is the form of the caustic nail.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	Of the cauterization of the softening of the eyelids of the eyes.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the eye is softened by disease or moisture, then cauterize it with a lunar caustic; and this is its form:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you, then cauterize it above the two eyebrows a little bit with two caustics in the whole length, and let them be elongated from the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And let the length of each caustic be according to the quantity of the eyebrow.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press too hard on your hand with the cauterization, according to the quantity that a third part of the eyelid is made small.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	Of the cauterization of the eyelid of the eye when the hair is converted to small pieces and turn the hand of the patient.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the hair of the patient is converted to small pieces and turned inside out, then cauterize it according to two ways, for cauterization or medicine that burns.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If it is a caustic of fire, command the patient to look at water that softens his hair, then let them be prolonged and spread out; and if he turns his hand, then you tighten the eyelids with a cloth so that it does not hurt, but his hair is born.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Then, with the hair born and spread out, then pause the head of the patient in the third position, and place your hand on the eyelids of his eyes with a cloth; and then trace the shape of a flash of lightning, and this is the beginning of the sign that corresponds to the hair.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	Then place a clove in oil or a pitting agent on the eyebrow.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	Then ignite the caustic, and this is its form:
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	Then cauterize the figure that has been drawn, little by little, until the surface of the eyebrow is burned and it looks like a flash of moss, all apparent at once.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	The sign of health in this work is that you see the eyelid of the eye already contracted and the eyebrows of the patient already lifted from the piercing of the eyebrow.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And then raise your hand and place it on the clove for three days, and then pause over it with a cloth until it is well.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then heal that with ointment, until it is cured.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	But if, for some reason, the hair falls out and the eyelid is softened, then do the cauterization again all at once.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	But if the hair is left in the eyelid, then cauterize it until it is raised to its natural position and spread out so that the eyebrows do not touch the eyebrow.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	But the caustic with medicine that burns is this: command the patient to look at water until his hair is spread out and turned inside out; then make a sign of the shape of a flash of moss, all apparent at once.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. .i., o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	Then take with you the following: sage, fennel seed, and bitter orange. And add them together in equal amounts. Then mix those three ingredients together and add water to them, then make the mixture into a paste so that it is not dry; then apply the paste to the sign of the shape of a flash of moss, and place it on the patient's head in the third position.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	Then place on it a small piece of the mixture and do not press it on your hand so that the patient feels the burning taste of the medicine, for the taste is by fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	Then, when you feel the burning taste of water, then let go of the medicine and make it flow with fire or a cut; for the taste is by fire or cutting; then wash the eyebrow with water; and consider if the eyelid has been lifted in this way with it washed, then it is well; and if not, then return to the medicine on the place where you have not applied the medicine, and it will be well.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	Then pause over it with a cloth until the eyebrow is well removed from the adhesion, and then heal that with ointment or another within which is cured.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And you should, in your operation, guard with diligence that the medicine does not fall into the eyebrow, and if the eyelid is softened by the hair falling out, then return to your medicine to the place where the eyebrow was softened, and truly so; and then turn back to the location where it is cured.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	This is the shape of a flash of moss.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And you should know that the eyebrows of men are different according to their size and youth; and then, according to water, your contraction is made.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And do not hide the path of treatment for those who study this craft.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	Of the cauterization of a fistula that is in the lacrimal eye of the eyebrow.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you heal the fistula with water that we have mentioned in the divisions of the eyes, and do not confer with your healing; then put a cloth on your hand so that it does not hurt or shake with his head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	Then place a clove in oil or a pitting agent on the eyebrow of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	Then ignite the caustic, and this is its form:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	Which is to say, as a shape of a cane or a feather of a bird, from one end to the other, where the caustic is made.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you see, let it penetrate into the other end.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you want, let it come out with a pull.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	But if you do this, then the wound will heal better.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	Then press the fistula if it is open, and draw out the pus and dry up that area.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not open, then open it and remove the pus from it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	Then place the fire above it, and take care that your hand or the patient does not get burned, and then put the fire on the nose bone and destroy it.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And if at the beginning of the fire it enters into the bone, then it is good; and if not, then repeat the fire once or twice, as is necessary, and leave it like that for three days, and place a wet and dry substance on it so that it heals.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	But if it is not healed after eleven days, then place an acute and corrosive medicine on it so that the bone is exposed and cut it according to what you think is necessary in the patient's chapter.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And another way of treating a fistula, which at first they said: "Enter into the place of the fistula and pour that in and then stop up that small crack from which it comes out: And put in that amount of molten lead; and then your hand with good retention, and do not damage the patient because the lead does not reach the bone of that; and cover what you have stopped up with albumen of milk or water, for lead adheres to the place of the fistula and heals it by a wonderful cure."
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed with water that we have mentioned in the fire and cure, then it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to administer a trauch from the nose and to reduce the fistula to the nose bone according to what comes out at its own place.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	On the Cauterization of a Wound from a Stone.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Vivid spots may appear on the lips, and more often on the lips of children.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	So if you treat those cracks with water that we have mentioned in the divisions and do not use your cure, then let fire pass slowly over it according to this form which it enters:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And its cavity according to the subtility of a knife.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Then place that slowly over those cuts so that the fire reaches the base of the cuts.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	Then heal that with a sharp instrument so that it heals.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	On the Cauterization of a Fistula in the Mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if there is an apoplexy in the uvula or on the palate or in the teeth' roots, then it breaks out and bleeds, and then it becomes dry and crusted over, and then it forms a fistula, and then you treat that and do not use your cure, then place that slowly over the fistula according to the quantity which is received into the fistula, and then put fire on the trauch of the fistula, and let your hand be so that the fire reaches the base of it, and at the back of it make one pull or two; and then heal that with water that we have mentioned in the cure so that it heals.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And if the healing has come off and has healed, then it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to expose the place and keep the bone腐した according to what you think is necessary in the patient' s chapter.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	On the Cauterization of Teeth and the Softening of Swellings.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	And if the swellings are softened by moisture and the teeth are loose, then treat those with medicines and do not confer with the patient, then place the cap of the mallet on the patient' s head, and place the fire's head on the shape which it comes out quickly, as if you place the jaw over the tooth and put a fire slowly over that, and let your hand be so that the heat of the fire reaches the base of the tooth.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	Then lift your hand up, and repeat the fire a few times according to what you want.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	Then let the mallet drink water from salt and hold it for an hour, and then stop it, because the loose tooth is fixed and the swollen gum is hardened and the corrupting moisture is dried out.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	On the Cauterization of Toothache.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When toothache is caused by cold or there is a burning or biting sensation, and you do not use your cure with medicine, then the fire' s cauterization is according to two ways: either cauterize it with cow's milk or with fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Cauterization with Cow's Milk: Take cow' s milk and heat it, then place that in a bowl of iron, and put the cap on it, and wrap the wrapper over the end of the tooth, and then pour the hot milk slowly over that, and let your hand be so that the milk touches the tooth quickly.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	Then repeat that milk a few times so that the heat of the fire reaches the roots of the teeth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you see, dip wool or cloth in the milk, and place that over the tooth, and then place the iron slowly over it so that the iron reaches the base of the tooth.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	But if the cauterization is with fire, then you hold the tooth in your hand or in the mouth and let fire pass slowly over it so that the heat of the fire does not reach the patient' s mouth.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	Then let the fire pass slowly over it according to its shape, and place that on the tooth, and your hand with something so that the fire does not reach the patient' s mouth; and then make a little water because the pain may return or in that day or in another day.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And when that fire has impressed the patient' s mouth with its heat and held it for an hour, and then stops drinking water; and this is the form of the fire.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And cauterize it according to what you see fit.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the form of the tube:
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	On the Cauterization of an Ekzosthesis.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	And if an exosthesis is made of slimy and foamy humors which do not submit to treatment by medicines, and you see the digestion of those slightly, then let fire pass slowly over it according to this form which it has, having two ends open so that the smoke from the fire can reach the other end, and place that fire over an exosthesis' s pus a few times, and if it does not agree with you, then place fire on the pus one time, and then stop it so that the smoke reaches the base of the exosthesis.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the exosthesis is small, then place the fire according to the quantity of that exosthesis, and let it be left for three days and place a wet cloth on it in the shape of a bandage so that it does not come out because of the smoke.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	Then heal that with a poultice, and cover it with a bandage, and wrap it up so that it heals.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And this is the form of the tube or two tubes for fire:
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter XXIII.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	On the Cauterization of a Ration's Sores and the Constriction of a Throat.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When the humors come up on the membrane of the lung, and more often when that water is caused by cold, then it is necessary to evacuate the mallet at first with laxative medicines, and then cauterize that in the place where it is stuck.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And keep your hand off of the cautery's rod, and do not burn it from the rope except a little bit.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	Then cauterize that with another cautery; the joint of the neck at the last vertebra.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	The cautery of him shall be sharp-pointed according to the preceding way.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	Then treat that with oil that is preceding it so that it may be healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	Of the cauterization of malady of the lungs and coughing.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When coughing and lung malady are of humidity, and the patient does not have a fever nor is it a new disease, then treat that with two cauterizations on the furcula in the places where they are wrinkled; and another cauterization on its middle location between two breasts; and the sharp-pointed cautery according to the preceding way.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you want, your cauterization is made with the pointed cautery that is called pointed; the shape of which you precede in the point of pain of ears.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And make points within the cavities; and treat that with oil that is preceding it so that it may be healed.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And then have three ramp; because of cauterization being one: according to this form, you can make three cauterizations:
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	Of the cauterization of tickling that is the head of the jaw.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the jaw is dislocated by Lubricious humidity and does not remain in its hour of its return, you shall reduce its dislocation within that it may return to its usual place, and then, because at first it reduces the dislocation, and the hernia is returned on its sides; and raises the rope which is at its beginning inside the tickling from the back, to the two digits of your left hand, if the joint has been dislocated at the beginnings inside the jaw.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And have two cauterizations that have two heads; and this is the way of him:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	Then cauterize the hernia within that it penetrates from one side to another; and then will come the figure of cauterization from four heads.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then make it subtle according to the quantity of attempt; and this is the way of him:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	In some cases, it is adjusted according to this count, and for that reason are the cauterizations.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	Then return on the cautery' side of salt, and then make it adhere to calmness, and that member does not hurt for any time until it is comforted.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	If the dislocation is at the beginnings and it is firm, then treat that with a sharp-pointed cautery or with a pointed one, because the joint is confirmed and the humidity is rumbling and the malady is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	Of the cauterization of the stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When there come into the stomach fritters and multiple humors within that it takes on its composition and they multiply to him, and if you continue the ways of cure and do not confirm it, then treat that with two cauterizations: one cautery leaves the foot for the quantity of a digit according to the cautery' shape, and two cauterizations leave the sides of the stomach according to that comes the figure of a triangular cauterization; and lengthen between those which are not adjusted so they will make a perforation.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	If the depth of the cautery is according to the quantity of the two-thirds of the thickness of the hernia.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And be the figure of the cautery according to this form six additions, And if you want, treat that with a large cautery according to this form in the middle location of the stomach: and this form is a circle according to this form.
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And be cauterized the stomach punctually according to that which of this cautery is frightened: and it is because you feel over the stomach punctually according to the quantity that you want to try, and then treat that with a cautery in the points; and then cure that with the preceding cure so that it may be healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	Of the cauterization of the frets.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When the fret hurts because of cold or humidity or coarse weather within that it takes on its usual composition; and you do not confirm it, then treat that with water that we have said and do not confirm it; if the patient is laid down on its back, and feel over the fret according to this quantity: and make three cauterizations according to this form on the fret of the sides of the neck, the hour before the patient goes to sleep.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And be the space according to that which each cautery is according to the thickness of the digit; and be the cautery according to the length of the right side.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	Do not confirm your cure with a cauterization.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	If the quantity of water that is put forward is according to half of the thickness of the hernia, and if it does not stay in place; and then be left, which has already extended its coysas, and raises its brasses.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the shape of the cauterization:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	You are able to make these cauterizations with a sharp knife, when it is subtlety and prudence in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And keep your hand off of overdoing in the cauterization, and be put forward the thickness of all the hernia so that it may reach to the intestines, because the hernia here is subtle; and you know water.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	Of the perforation of an abscess with a cauterization.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When there is an excision or abscess in the fret and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the fret or in its membrane, then if it is in the flesh of the fret, the patient will feel a great pain and its acuteness.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	If it is in the membrane of the fret, the pain is acuter and often it weakens the patient's medicines.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Then that the patient is turned on its back, and then feel over the location of the abscess; and then light a cauterization which is made according to the preceding way.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	Then treat with that and cauterize within that all the hernia is compressed, within that it reaches to the ciphac, within that in fire it is healed.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that with the preceding cure of other abscesses so that it may be healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And do not confirm that this form of cauterization is used but the one which you studied in The Art of Medicine and by which many bad diseases have been cured; however, sometimes it can be done on this operation, but mainly leave it to us, and it is better.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	Of the cauterization of plagues.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	They said that the small cauterizations of the chirurgery of surgery to the plagues are according to this way: and it is because you take from the razits of the chirurgery of surgery a digit that is long and dry, and be it according to the thickness of the digit.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	Then submerge that in oil and dry it, then treat with a small cauterization on the place where the furcula is connected to the neck; and two small cauterizations are made on either side of the beard, one a little bit lower; and two small cauterizations are made on either side of the neck between the fifth rib and the chin, slightly lower; and another small cauterization in the middle location of the back; and one more on the stomach, and three more on the sides behind; and one small cauterization in the place where the two sides of the back meet; and two more cauterizations are made on either side of the neck.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And do not buy your hand from the cautery, because it is in the line of the cord in operation.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And already the servants say to you that they are servants of men who use a cautery like iron and fire, and place it in that place which is between the ribs, until we come to that apoplexy and it is forgotten disease, for thus have I said about the apoplexy of the baby.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	May in this perforation with cautery is not feared fear because soon it will happen in the place of the fistula to which there is no cure.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter.XXX.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	Of the cauterization of the melts.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you cure the malady of the melts, take care that you have not said about the cure in the division and do not confer your cure, then cauterize it in three ways, all of which are right, one is that you make three cauterizations or four according to the length of the melts according to the figure of the cauterizes of the baby, the figure of which has preceded.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And be between each cauterize the thickness of a finger or a little less, and the manner of the cauterize is the manner which I have said in the cauterize of the baby equally.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not buy your hand from the cautery; and the malady be above its two.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And another way to cauterize is that you ignite the cauterize having two vertiments, which causes I have said in the chapter of dislocation of the muscle, and raise the cord which is in the end of the melts the one that stops the malady of the left.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And be your elevation with which you raise the cord according to the length of the body, so that they are made cauterizes according to the breadth of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And bring together the two vertiments, ignite fire, in that within which enters the cord from the other side.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And return the cauterize; and now there are four cauterizes.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you see, cauterize with a cauterize having three vertiments.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And you cure the cauterize more than it has remained to get bruised by troops' days, because it is more confident that the other causes precede in the cure.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter.XXXI.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	Of the cauterization of hydrops.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cauterize not catch in hydrops but properly in three.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you cure the hydrops with the ways of cure which I have said in the division and do not confer your cure, then return that it cauterizes with four cauterizes in the circuit of the womb and one cauterize on the stomach, and another cauterize on the baby, and another cauterize on the melts, and two cauterizes between the ribs of the two, and a cauterize in the right of the foot, and another cauterize on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the quantity of the depth of the cauterize is proppendan to the spicity of the cord.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And return the cauterize uppermost that you get bruised for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And you do not evacuate the malady of cure appropriately that they are added to the two intentions, and the other returns to it with the help of healing.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The form of the cauterize with which it is cauterized the stomach is keyhole according to the form of that preceding, and it is that with which is cauterized the two is olive according to which is preceding its form.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter.XXXII.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	Of the cauterization of the feet and of the thighs.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are apostemated in hydrops and are filled with watery urine, return that you cauterize the feet on the two of the foot with a keyhole shape according to which is preceding its form, and raise your hand with the cauterize, and do not twist that; and return to raise your hand, and do not return it all, because the watery urine returns.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	It is the cauterize according to this form: And return it on the two thighs with two cauterizes, and in each thigh be made cauterize at the end of the cauterize knife.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And be the cauterize according to the length of the thigh: and leave it down and the other is lower on your place in the thigh; and over each thigh, two cauterizes.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And return the plague uppermost that it gets cured for a long time that some urine returns from it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And you cure them by those causes which I have said.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter.XXXIII.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	Of the cauterization of the belly.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When the belly is parched and moistened by felling and retentive fluids, it is the digestive and retenitive virtue which are in the belly and the intestines, and it is cured with the ways of cure which I have said, and do not confer your cure, and sometimes the malady suffers cauterize of the exhibiting virtue, then cauterize that with a great cauterize on its two stomach according to which has preceded in the cauterization of the belly, with a cauterize of the circle and with four cauterizes in the circuit of the delicate entrails, with a cauterize keyhole; and a cauterize about the neck with a great one, or with two cauterizes.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if sometimes the exuberant fluids are suffered by the malady of the water, then cauterize that on the penticle and on the intestines, and fort hold fast adjusting two cauterizes on the stomach and close to the inguinas, because it is a perfect cure for the health of which there is no need.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter.XXXIV.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	Of the cauterization of ancient hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When so in the nature remains ancient hemorrhoids or a humor of gross felling or corrupt fluids, they are cured with the water which I have said in the division and do not confer your own cure, then return that it cauterizes with three cauterizes on the two sponds of the two little and triangular, and one cauterize over the navel is cut by the two.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if you accept that the belly of the patient is parched and his food is not dried up, and that his face is sometimes apostemated, then return that it cauterizes on the belly with a great cauterize according to which has preceded; and a cauterize on the baby, and another cauterize on the melts of the patient with a cauterize keyhole, and leave the cauterize for some time uppermost, then cure its inside which is sana.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter.XXXV.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	Of the cauterization of ateyl by separation from each other.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you separate ateyl, then your hand ignites the cauterize which is gathered with fire.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	And return that it ignites in that ateyl which is separated, and the last hand within which enters the cauterize at the opening of the vein from which comes the blood.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And make one time or two times, because if the ateyl is troops, then cauterize each of them according to which I have said, and return to cure those with the water which you have given them within their openings so that they are sana.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize with a great cauterize on the neck, it is more likely to cause death.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter.XXXVI.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	Of the cauterization of fistulas which are caused in nature by the separation of the two.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When Nature does not obey to the work which I have said in its place, and the patient is frightened by the water, he is healed with a cauterize.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Then when someone has a fistula in the nature behind and it is ancient, I extract from it the corrupted humors and then what must be put there that it becomes covered, which can be done with a subtle attempt, and the quantity of its depth is then placed to match the mentioned attempted.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Then bring the cautery that resembles a ray.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And then set this cautery on fire in this fistula, and according to the quantity in which it intrudes into the attempt.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And repeat on that cautery inside which are burned those corrupted humors once or twice or three times, according to the quantity of your need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And beware of burning the nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes into the body of the bladder or the hernia, then beware of all these places; and do not pass there unless the fistula is in a muscular location and you think it does not penetrate.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	Then cure that area so that it is healed.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the location is sealed and there are no matter left from it, and so remain for a long time, then you will know that it has been completely cured.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if those matters are not left from it, then you will know that it is penetrating or into the prostate of it or flowing out from those causes from which there will be a memory in its location.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	Of the cauterization of the sores.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When in the sores there is pain from cold or from strong wind, and because of this the patient's legs are stiff, then when you cauterize that which is above the sores, cauterize each sore with a pointed cautery from which the memory will recur.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And then firmly cauterize it with a small piece of cautery so that three little scars will be left, and then they heal behind in a hurry.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	Of the cauterization of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When it happens in the bladder that it becomes soft and moist through cold and moisture, so that the patient' water does not hold, then cauterize that at the top of three small pieces of cautery on the bladder, where the hair of the penis begins, and cauterize with one cautery in the right part, and another in the left.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And be the length of each cautery according to the quantity of the hair of the penis; and cauterize that with a cautery at the top of the two, or with two cauteries if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And be a pointed cautery according to how it has progressed.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	Of the cauterization of the hernia.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When there is cold and moisture in the hernia, and because of this the pregnancy becomes prevented, and the menstrual blood of it is corrupted, and the beginning of its causing pain is delayed, then when that location is cauterized with three cauteries in the circle of the navel, as I have said above in the cauterization of the bladder; and a cautery at the top of the two, or two cauteries, and be a pointed cautery.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	Of the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle joint.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When moist secretions are infiltrated in the joint of the ankle, and the pain is caused by the movement of its location, and it is indicated that the cushion is prolonged on the other when compared to it.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the location of the dislocation is atrophied in it which it does not bend.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then when you cauterize the patient' ankle from above with a cautery that resembles a ring, so that you have a subtle attempt in the circle of that location as it is rolled over, and so that that location falls on its own place of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And be the cautery from which precedes the form in the cauterization of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this cautery is not at your disposal, then cauterize it with three cauteries that resemble olives.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And be made according to the quantity of the bitterness of all the cord; and then cure that location so that it is healed.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	Of the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When there is pain in the ankle joint, and it is caused by cold and moisture, so that the patient' legs are stiff with water, then when you do not have the medicine that I have said, and that water is ancient, then when you lack the medicine of humors that are gross, either with spoiled pills or artificial ones or that resemble them; then cauterize that.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And the way of the cautery in that place is according to two ways: or cauterize with burning medicines, or cauterize with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	Then according to two proven ways, of which one is to cauterize that at the top of the foot with three triangular cauteries according to this shape; and make them with good depth.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And be the space between each cautery, which is the quantity of the bitterness of that which I have said; and if the cautery is small or large.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	Some few steps are made on this: a cautery over the middle of the foot on the top part for four cauteries.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you wish, cauterize with a ring that resembles the circle in which the dislocation of the ankle joint is caused; and the ring should be continuous, and its bitterness should be of all the cord.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the way to cauterize in cytiquism when pain adheres to the ankle and it does not extend within the cushion.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	But if it extends within the cushion, then cauterize that with two cauteries on the cushion over the location at which the pain occurs; and one cautery on the top of the foot for four times a little is necessary in the part that is flexible.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if the cautery is small, and be the depth of the cautery according to the quantity of the bitterness of all the cord.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the patient' leg bends that pain extends to the foot, then cauterize that where it bends with three or four or more points if you need them.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the patient' leg bends that pain is on the side of the foot near the heel, then cauterize that where it bends with a small cautery.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And beware in any cauterization that you do not finish with fire; and this can cause great pain to the nerves or sever damage, and because of this, it is on the patient' leg like an unclean thing or a contracture.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	You have already seen one of those which I cauterized on the big toe and finished it off with fire in the cauterization, and the bed was burned until the finger; and fire penetrated through all the foot.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	Then soon there came a strong solution for the stomach, and then death.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two parts, then cauterize each according to this way.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And the wise said in the cauterization of the ankle, from which this way is: make it resemble a ring of iron, whose circle is most of a palm; and it should be according to its size, a little less than a date nut or more than a date nut.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And within that ring there is another third part; and be the length of those hairs according to the quantity of the hair of the penis; and let them be divided into two parts with rings of iron; and this is the way of it:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Then let it be ignited in the fire within which it becomes red and makes sparks; then let it be placed on the top of the ankle, and let the patient' leg bend over his thigh.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And therefore cauterize that with three rounded cauterizations on a plate.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And let it rest for three days; and let the plaster be applied to the wound and let the wound be left open for seven days; and then let the plague be cured by itself.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Saying of Al-Bukhari: O son, with regard to this species of cauterization we have little experience because we fear its regard and for that reason we have found few who look at it.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	May there be fewer cauterizations on him who has suffered them, and may he turn away from him who looks at him!
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	May there be fewer medicinal cauterizations that you make two circles with a sharp tool that would pass through the door of iron; its length is equal to the width of its surface, which are two nuts or keys.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the space between each is equal to the quantity of its thickness; and are open above and below, and are so arranged that they contain themselves according to this form:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	And place your hand over the patient's ankle joint while he sits on his side; and press your thumb onto the top of the ankle; and take a little tail of water between two circles, and its quality is that it should be with a small fire little by little, and let it go for an hour, and endure the pain of the patient and the burning of him -- as he does with fire -- until the pain stops.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And then lift your hand up from the instrument and wash the tail of water from all the ankle with two-handed water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And let it rest for three days and place the plaster on him until the burning becomes more severe, and let it go for several days, and run after him with a sharp tool; this is the last resort.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And therefore cauterize that with three rounded cauterizations on a plate.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain is widespread within the space or the leg, make the statue with him that contains water according to what was done in the ankle joint.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the way of water tail, and I have already written it in the treatise on the correction of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Take of alkali and of the non-dissolving half of two, and cut it in half and place it on a new wave from which the halves are pierced with a small hole according to the quantity that enters him.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And place the source of the other wave on top of that alkali and of the non-dissolving half of two, and press those with your hand by good compression, and let the wave that sends away him of sharp water in the halves go to the wave covered.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And then adjust all that water, and put it on another lively half of alkali, because that one is also sharpened by a strong force, which is administered in small doses of medicine and cauterization of the other members, because operation does fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And then, from some medicines there are that are cauterized thickly, as well as to be made to go out and to bring back to what is made to go out and to return again, and they are mixed.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And Gualia told me about a man from the people of Al-Andalus with his operation and treatment that healed the pain of his ankle and sciatica, and he was very pleased with it, saying: "There is no need for any other treatment, and because it is healed within one day as well as with massage, for now I know this [method]."
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And it should be taken from a clear vine, and if it is not cleared, take it from the fig tree that is recent; and let it be trissada with a little bit of salt and be placed on the ankle in which the pain is, or in the crotch, or in the leg, and be looked at.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And let it rest for the quantity of three hours, or the quantity that the patient tolerates a burning sensation.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And then put him in the bath and when his body is heated up, bring him into the sun because the pain stops and he is healed.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	You should know that there is no need to add something to these medicines except for the evacuation of the body.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	May Al-Asorides has said that when the vein is tightened by a goat's skin, it should be washed with old oil, and placed between the feet of the leg and between the fossils.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And then take dried goat' s skin and inflame that with fire within it is made of carbon; and then place him over the wool and let it rest until it is dried up.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And then repeat that water, and do not stop until the water is heated within the ankle and the pain stops.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	This method of cauterization is called cauterization by goats.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter LXXII.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	Of Pain's Cauterization.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Some pains are in two ways because of two causes, namely because of a change of place or a wound or excessive evacuation, and because of the similarity of those to what happens because of the application of a rubbing substance or a wet one.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	There is only one kind of cauterization that is made by the application of a rubbing substance.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Then there is only one way of evacuating the patient with pills that are similar to each other, which are made on both sides of the line according to the location of the pain, because there are three lines in which cauterizations are applied, or more, according to the quantity that comes out from the tolerance of the patient and the virtue of the substance.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	Then it should be done cauterization by means of a point.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, do cauterization with three cauterizations or four as follows:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter LXII.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	Of Cauterization at the Beginning of Gilbosity.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Some pain is common in small children; and the beginning of it can be seen in children by a change in their appearance, by the elevation of their temperature, and by the movement that happens in them.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	It is felt in the last spine of the back and in the bones that are already beginning to rise above the others.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And when you see water and want to prevent it, then cauterize that with a circle according to this form:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	that takes the cauterization on all sides of the spine joint.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you want, cauterize in the circuit of the spine with a point-type cauterization.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	The points should be placed among them.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	And then let it heal the place with water that we have said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	May there be guard that cauterization is not administered in a condition of a spasm of nerves.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter LXIV.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	Of Cauterization for Gout and Joint Pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and when pains occur in the feet, it is because this is what is called gout properly.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And then when the gout of a frothing cause is cured by a certain way of treatment and the pains are not increased, then the burning must be cauterized.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And it is that you cauterize that with an evacuation in the circuit of the joint of the leg with a few cauterizations.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	It should be made by means of olive oil, and this is its form:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pains radiate inside the ankles or other joints, and when there are swelling of the toes it is necessary to make them smaller, then cauterize each toe with three or four cauterizations altogether with this cautery.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if you need to make many cauterizations that these cauterizations are necessary for him, then cauterize it and don't press too much with your hand before cauterization, being just the surface of the foot.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pains radiate inside the toe and the two ankles, then administer the cauterization that we have already said in the previous chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pains occur only there, and it is called diabetes, then make points on the line of fire as it revolves, making points on these two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if there are still pains in the toes, then make points on the line of fire on each toe and on the nail of the hand.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pains radiate towards the sides in the thighs or the muscles, then cauterize all of them on both sides.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And don't evacuate the patient if he doesn't have good regime and reception of medicines, because if it is done well and the fire is extinguished with this cauterization, God helps it.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter. XLV.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	Of cauterization for breaks.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When there is a break in the ankles and saying to the patient that he will have his meal later, and he uses soothing means so that the wound of his belly does not hurt.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	Then follow the patient between your two legs, and order him to keep his genitals within so that the hernia appears or the intestine comes out.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	Then return it to the toes and hide the break on the bones of the penis with a ring that looks similar to a half-circle of the ribs that are separated.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Then light the cauterization in this way:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	within so that it is a small fire and it makes sparks.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient’s thighs and placed a cushion under them, another servant is on their legs, and another is on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	Then place the cauterization on that mark with your hand, facing down, and put it in so that you can see the bones of the penis in the middle; and repeat it for the other side if you don't get it right the first time by seeing them in the middle.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	Observe with care the movement of the intestine during the time of your cauterization, so that you don't burn it and cause death or other great evil to the patient.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And you should know that if you don't have the bone, you don't operate.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And the cauterization of children must be done with care, according to their age and size.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	Then clean the place where the cauterization was made for three days, so that it doesn't get infected.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And you should take care of those with other injuries, so they are healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And the patient should lie on his back for ten days, so that the wound and the plague are sealed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And you should not give him food according to the length of his recovery time; the intestine must not burn if it doesn' t need effort to heal.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And when he is ready to be taken away after ten days, then administer him a good diet, and keep him for another forty days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And it should be well-organized work and well-filled with food and drink; and it should be very serious, because when one follows this complete regime of healing, it is cured.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And I will tell you about the healing of other breaks in the belly, and begin with it, and don' t stop, then cauterize that break with a third cauterization according to its quantity; and if there is another break, clean it with water, and if it isn' t cured.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And already some said that the first break should be cauterized with a triangular cauterization according to this form, because it is marked like this:
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	And the line that goes down from the top to the bottom of the break, and another line on top of it; and place your hand with a ring-shaped cauterization on top of it, first because it is easier and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter. XLV.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	Of cauterization for twists.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When there is pain in the arms or legs due to a fall or blow, and that pain persists for a long time, and you don' t give him medication; then cauterize it with a pointed cauterization.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And the cauterization of each member according to its size and age, and the effort and danger of it; and the location of the twist and pain.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	So if he is cured after the first cauterization, it is good; otherwise, repeat it; because usually those pains are due to a twist in the member that touches the patient's body, so you should cauterize it to heal him.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter. XLVii.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	Of cauterization for leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	With a great deal of care if it is leprosy that is caused by putrefaction of fire and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	Then consider if the leprosy is caused by putrefaction of fire and sadness; and if you want to cauterize it, think whether it is cured with water that we have said in the division and don' t forget, nor be afraid about the patient that corruption embraces all his body and all his composition, then cauterize it on the top of the head at the middle place of the scalp, and on the second one away from it, facing the back of the hair; and both on two sides; and behind, on the neck or servitz.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And finally your hand with a little ring of cauterization that is kept in the bone and leaves it moved; so that the exhalation of thick vapors is cleared from it; and cauterize it on itself according to what is necessary.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if leprosy is already spread on the patient and clearly manifest, then consider that you cauterize it with those cauterizations that we have said in the head; and on the tip of the nose, and two on each ear, and two on the two sides of the neck, and one behind, near the chin, and another over it, and two on the shoulders, and one on each shoulder, and two on the two thighs, and one on each thigh, and two on the two knees, and one on each knee, and two on the two ankles, and one on each foot; and finally, remember to cauterize all these places.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And keep away from those nerves that are under the skull; do not burn them.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	With some cauterizations it is done on the bone of the penis and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another over the fist.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And know that the more you apply cautery, the greater healing and benefit there will be; and know that the patient has no pain in cauterization, just as they have it with surgery, since the body is already numb.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And where the cauterization is great or small according to the limbs and joints according to what precedes the instruments.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then take care in applying cautery with charred cow dung mixed with mel and the other cure within so that it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter .xlviii.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	Of Cauterization in Stupor.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When any member is stiff or asleep and is treated with medicine, oils, and plasters, and it does not heal, then cauterize that stiff member according to the size of the member or the age.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And this small cauterization enters into the essence of the bond a little.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then take care in that one with vinegar within so that it is healed.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And some veins are cauterized when the body is cold, which affects the main and foot, and the spinal cord of the two and four limbs, and the nerves that move that member, and it is healed.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	More should not be applied to this except for one who knows the anatomy of the limbs and the exit of the nerves throughout the whole body moving.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter.xlix.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	Of Cauterization in Scars that are Morphus.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When scars are old and do not respond to any of the medicine enema, then cauterize that one with a small cauterization according to the essence of the bond within so that the whiteness and color of it is changed, and the color of it is altered.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	Then take care in applying to that one with charred cow dung and lentils, with roselight oil and arnavosa leaves, and holy water or St. John's wort, all mixed together, and bind it with a cloth and place it on the area within so that it is healed.
Capitol .l.	Chapter.l.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	Of Cauterization in Crankiness.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When the cancer has begun and you want to remove that star, then cauterize it with a circular cauterization in the path of its rotation.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	The wise said that it should be cauterized with the last cauterization in its own place; but I have not seen this, for I think that it is ulcerated, and I have already seen it a few times.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And it is said to be applied in the path of its rotation with a circular cauterization as mentioned above, or with a dot of cauterization.
Capitol .li.	Chapter.li.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	Of Cauterization in Adultery.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When an adultery is delayed in maturity, and it becomes late due to the age of the patient, or old age, which causes decay and deficiency, and you want to hasten its maturity; then cauterize it with a small dot of cauterization in the path of its rotation, leaving it unhealed; for it will quickly mature.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	But if you want to pierce it with cauterization, then take this cauterization form and place it on the patient' s own place within so that it enters into the bond.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the cauterization is placed in that location that has been left behind, so that the arms may be relieved; then take care in applying to it within so that it is healed.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter.lii.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	Of Cauterization in Corrosion.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corrodent is ambulatory corruption in the limb, which corrodes that one as if it were eating dry wood with fire.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore, if that corrosion occurs in a location where it suffers from fire cauterization, then take small, sharp, pointed cauterization tools and apply them to that location where corrosion occurs, and apply large cauterization according to what is appropriate in that location where the corrosion occurs.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	Then cauterize all of it within so that you eradicate all corrosion and do not affect any other cause.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	Then leave it unhealed for three days, and apply a mixture of oil and vinegar to the cauterized areas within so that all scars are completely eradicated and all corrosion is gone.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	Then take care in applying to that one with a meat-producing enema.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	But if, after three days of applying the meat-producing enema and it is not corrupted, then apply again to this one where it is rotten in the locations that are corrupted;
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	Corrosion is cured by some means with acute medicine, for that one is half of cauterization in place.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	But cauterization with fire is more beneficial.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	The healing of it with acute medicine in the division, and then take this one when you are going to sleep.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter.liiii.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	Of Cauterization in Claws and of the Others.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	There are claws that come out at the back of the leg, and this is a gross cause, exit, which bites the leg; and it is cauterized in two ways: with fire cauterization and water tail cauterization.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	But fire cauterization is that you ignite the cauterization with the appearance of a butterfly fluttering about, which is made of iron according to its quantity that contains the claw completely, and it is made of delicate edges.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	Then place the ignited cauterization on the claw, and turn it over with the cauterization in its path within so that the cauterization reaches the depth of the claw.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	Leave it unhealed for three days within so that it begins to burn the arm.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	Then apply this one with dried rose leaves crushed with salt, and leave the application on it for a moment, for that one will eradicate its roots.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	Then take care in applying to the location with a meat-producing enema within so that it is healed.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if it is not converted, and small spots occur on the surface of the body, especially in the feet, then when you apply cauterization with water tail, and that one takes a little piece of wax or iron or a butterfly's wing, and places it on the claw; and when you press your hand, turn it over with the application of a small amount of water tail, and reapply the pressure of your hand, and make sure the tail of water passes through the root of the claw; and wait for the patient for a little while for the biting of the water tail according to the hour, and then take off the application, for the claw will be cured with its roots.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And so it was applied to this one that it is the other within so that you pass over all of them in the body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	Then take care in applying to those bumps that the roots of the claws are eradicated with meat-producing enemas, through which the animal gets its food.
Capitol .liiii.	Chapter.liiii.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	Of Cauterization in Tremors.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When there is a tremor due to friction in the nerves or fever from rubbing, or a similar cause, then take care when you apply cauterization to this one with four cauterizations or two over the spines of the two limbs, between each spine with one cauterization; and on the feet of the patient, and on the abdomen, with an olive cauterization.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the tremors of the patient cease, and the healing of the feverous body quickens.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter.lv.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	Of Cauterization in Accidental Injuries to the Body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When the body is accidentally injured and it forms pustules that are produced from gross corruption; then at the beginning, when it appears, it should be cauterized completely on the top of the fistula with delicate edges cauterization, and the extremities of it are extended with fire; or with a long edge cauterization; or with a lenticular cauterization.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And some are cauterized by burning at the beginning of their expulsion according to this method; and they are not burned, but the superfluity is broken up and cured from that.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	But it must be noted that this is not done by the use of the blade of a scalpel.
Capitol lvi.	Chapter VI.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	Of cauterization of blood flowing from an injury with an arc.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Of the treatment of blood flowing from an injury caused by a blade, which often leads to gangrene, or the incision of abscesses or the cauterization of a member, and then it is difficult to heal.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Therefore, when you have applied the cauterizer to the member, place your hand over the orifice of the blade, and pause it over that place so that the blood does not flow out from under your hand, and do not let it escape.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	Then put on the fire a few and large hot coals, for many reasons, and exhale them over those places where they are to be heated.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	Then take from them a small or a large one according to the place and pulse where the artery is broken, with rapidity before the blood has stopped flowing completely, and cauterize that place as soon as possible after closing it.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the blood is expelled from the orifice of the artery while you are holding the cauterizer and exhaling it, then take another one carefully prepared on the fire, and then do not stop applying it to another place where the blood has been stopped.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And you must take care not to burn the nerve here, and that other evil does not come upon the patient.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And you must know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to stop it by constricting the place, and more so when the artery is large, unless in one of four ways: or if you cauterize it as described above, or if you extract it when it should not be extracted, for when it is extracted the extremities of the member are burned and the blood is stopped, or that it is tied with a bandage or twisted by a strong strap, or that it is placed on medicine whose virtue is to stop the blood; and they are strangled by pulleys.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	But that which administrates a severe constriction of the member and a strong strap by position or for other reasons does not succeed except in some cases.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	But if this is applied to some place that does not have the medicine present, or that does not need it, then open the pause of the said indication on the orifice of that vein as described above, and understand a severe constriction of the member where the pulse stops from its normal movement, and over the blade do not allow it to be re-moved; and over the blade sprinkle cold water of a great coolness as long as the blood congeals and thickens; and also burn the place where cauterization or medicine is needed.
Comensa la segonda partida.	The second division begins.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Of incision and piercing, of blisters and of fluid extraction, of gangrene and of its appearances.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are words of Avicenna.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have already said in the first chapter all diseases in which cauterization by fire and medicine is appropriate, and their occasions and causes, and the instruments with which the cauterization should be done; and we will now arrange the chapters of the second part according to the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And I will proceed in this chapter in that way, so that what is desired may be found, then over that that the seeker has demanded.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And before I begin with you, know, remember, and learn that which in this chapter is for the sake of fear for you who are seeking; for it is in the first chapter about cauterization.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And for you who are seeking, know that which must be done with great care, for in the operation described in this chapter many things can be expelled from an injury, or cut off, or burned, or drained, or made to pass by a leech; and similar procedures.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And of all these fear and horror accompanies them, and in the worst case, death awaits them.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I warn you that in this place do not fall what is dangerous, for some of the things that happen to you are caused by the bad ways of men who have fallen ill.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And of them is some who, by their illness, go astray and often die, and because of the urgency of their illness, and because of the long duration of their illness, and because of the fear with which one dies when one suffers from it.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And those are the ones who give you hope and comfort you, but their illness is pernicious.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And it is not that you should consent to such a way of doing things with you as this; and your caution should be greater than your haste, and your rapidity; and do not presume any reason about it except by certain knowledge which certifies it for you, and to which the glorious succession of praise belongs.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And use in the treatment of all your illnesses by prescription and indication of that which is beneficial for you, because it is in that way that you are helped in gaining fame and memory, glory and honor.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Or children, God in you inspirers the understanding and does not withdraw from you guidance and protection, for it is in His hand.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have arranged this chapter by chapters according to what precedes in the chapter of treatment of the head within the feet, so that what you are seeking may be found with you who are seeking and from which you needed it.
Capitol primier.	Chapter One.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	Of the treatment of water which is contained in the head of children.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	And you must know that this illness which appears in children is caused by the birth, and when the body of the child becomes light-headed.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And some are caused by a hidden cause which is not understood.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	But I have not seen this illness except in children; and all those whom I saw had died, and for that reason I considered it to be a great work in them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I have seen a child whose head was filled with water, and the head remained the same size for it could not support itself because of the great size of its head, and more than the moisture increased within it until fire killed it.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this moisture is added between the cheek and the skull, or it is added behind the skull, or it is added above the skull.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	For the operation in that case, if the moisture is between the cheek and the skull and the abscess is small, then you should cut into the middle of the head in length, and make two holes where the moisture runs, and this is the shape of the sponge:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And if the moisture increases more and the abscess grows larger, then there are two splits according to this way:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the moisture is behind the skull, it is a sign that you open the combs of the head completely and press the water out when you wrap them with your hand on the inside, and do not let it escape to you who are seeking.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	Then you should cut into the middle of the head according to this way:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And then take out all the moisture by cutting it; and make the splits wide with strips and feathers; and then tie it up, and cure the pulse with hot water on the fifth day, and then clean the member and treat it with dry food of little moisture until the member is comfortable and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	Here is the translation of the text:
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And watch that you do not incise the artery, and take care that the blood flows from the patient as a result of this escape of blood through the opening, for this flow of blood causes pain and makes the patient faint.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter .ii.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	Of incisions into the arteries that are close to the ears, called helissises.
Capitol segon.	Chapter second.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When this catarrh or fever is in the feet or legs, and it has been long standing; then, if you have not already used medicine on it, use this second cure by making an incision in those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And therefore cover up when you want to make an incision in the head of the patient, and rub the area with a harsh cloth to prevent hair from getting in the way; also strengthen the neck of the patient with some cloth; and consider where the veins pulsate; and the places near the ears are separated from each other by certain parts in some men.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And place your hand on the artery to feel for the pulse; and make an incision in each with a sharp tool, entering into the bone, and let it run according to the shape of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you wish, insert your hand between the artery and the skin, and separate the two at the incisions made in each part.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And the length of the incision should be twice the distance between two fingers, because when a vein is incised, the pulse will beat twice as fast, and this can cause fainting.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	Except if the artery cannot be felt, then cover up because you will need to measure the distance from the ear to three fingers' width, and then feel for the pulse, and enter into the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And let go of the pulse, and let the amount of blood be measured in a vessel. And hold the patient's leg firmly while measuring, for this amount of blood is second to that which appears from the virtue of the patient and the expansion of the artery.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And therefore consider the possibility of gangrene; and if there is any cause of swelling in the bone, then incise it so that it does not cause apoplexy.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And therefore strengthen the pulse with plums and linen cloth; and protect that with oil, and cure it within by applying ointment until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter.iii.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	Of the extraction of arteries that are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When this emigranea (old age) or fever occurs suddenly, with the use of herbal remedies and due to the quality of the air in the temples, or if it is violent and similar to those mentioned above, then we will address ourselves to the treatment of these malignant diseases by extracting the arteries in the temples, or by cauterizing them as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the way of performing the operation and extracting them is that the patient shaves the hair in the temples where it appears; also consider the artery that is pulsating there, for it is hidden except by its pulse. It is only seen in a few men due to its velocity.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden from you, then strengthen the neck of the patient with some cloth; and rub the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the liquid with cold water until the artery appears clearly to you.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	Then take this grip, which is the shape of this:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then take the thread with ease until you reach the artery; and let go of it at the roots; and cut off that part of the thread that is between the two roots; also discover those threads that are on the outside, all of them.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	Except if the artery is thin, then wrap it with a thread at its extreme end; and make an incision in that one according to the shape of the leg, which should be longer than shorter, and there will not be a flow of blood because it would not be incised if it were not long.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And then let go of the pulse of half a vessel. To two or three.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the artery is thick, then cover it with two threads of linen or rope, strong and long, and do not allow any putrefaction in front of the consolidation of the pulse, and let there be a flow of blood.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And then make an incision between two linen threads; and cut it at that time or another.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you wish, cauterize it with a sharp instrument within the bone until the extremities are incised, and set this work in order.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	It is better work than the patient has fever or a cold; for cauterization helps those causes that assist in the ending of the humors, so it is better to do it quickly.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then extract the arteries that you have shaven at the base of the head, and place them on a clean cloth; and let them rest for a moment, and cure them with dry medicines to prevent the flesh from rotting, and let it run according to the shape of the legs until it is healed.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if while you operate on another part of the body there is a flow of blood from the artery, then let it stop bleeding by strengthening your hand within that area; and stop it with cauterization or with something else that stops the blood.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if any of those causes are not present, then pause the thread over the area until the pulse stops bleeding; and tie it with a knot, and wet that place with very cold water until the pulse quiets down, and strengthen it according to what you have.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And the best way to extract an artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two knives; and pause each one, lit a fire, and let it run until it reaches the bone, and make an incision between the two roots, so that it runs along with those two threads, for they are not consolidated by this cauterization.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	This is the form of the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	The acute points of both knives.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	However, if the points of both knives are not acute, then use sharp ones that are suitable for each one; and do not cut the flesh with too much speed.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Then, if there is any thickness in them, the heat of the fire is held back in them, and the flesh is cut off easily.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	This work is better than all works, and it is easier.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	The distance between the two knives should be the quantity of the thickness of the thread.
Capitol quart.	Chapter fourth.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	Of the cure for sore eyes from acrid tears.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When it is because of acrid tears, and those veins are above the forehead that cause this problem, and do not apply medicine to it; and often the face of the patient becomes red, and feels as if it were burning from the acridity of the tears; also, the eyelids are scratched by their sharpness, and the skin is burned by the acrimony of the tears; therefore, use this operation for them, and let them rest for a moment.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And so you order the patient to rub his skin with a leather glove, and insert three slits evenly spaced according to the length of his forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the slit falls two times: the first slit be evenly spaced to the length of the nose in the middle location of the forehead, and the second according to the length a little movement of the eyelids that are on the eyelid, and the third from the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And be careful about the incisions of the wounds that are in two pieces, and extend your hand from the continuation of both the jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space between each incision is three times adjusted.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a sponge of the dry or rags to remove the sweat from the wound.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	Then place the sponge with two sharp extremities, whose this form is the shape of the incision:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	to go to the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Then remove all the tissue that is between two incisions in the middle of the bone and insert it into the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	Then place this sponge and insert it into the first incision again with another instrument called a scalpel, sharp on one side and blunt on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	Then pause the skin of him on the edge of the wound attached to the tissue, and the edges of him away from the bone, and insert it into that which reaches the middle slit, and cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the arms.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	Then be continued the incision as long as the tissue allows, and insert it into that which reaches the middle slit before the other one.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And then pour from the wound a little quantity of water, squeeze the feet of the wound.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	Then place in each slit a little piece of twine, and place on these dusts impregnated with wine and oil and vinegar and let it not develop pus.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day let him remove the bandage and administer a great infusion of lukewarm water, and then clean it with basilic oil with rose water and other things so that the blisters are healed.
Capitol .v.	Capitol
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	Of the cure of blisters by means of cats and to the arms descending from the parts inside of the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When in addition to the cats hot and continuous, and often the arms of the patient exhausted little, and now the care for their healing, and their eyelids ulcerated and of their eyes the skin, and in the forehead sharp pain when they rub it and the sudden withdrawal of the blood, then know that these accidents do not proceed except from small veins that come out of the inside parts.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best cure in these is this: that you order the patient to rub his forehead, and insert three slits in the middle location (and begin with the incision of the left temple within the right temple; and be a cut through the bone; and extend your hand from the eyelids that are hot due to mastication), until it is exposed.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry all the wound with a sponge or rags and then insert between the two edges of the slit a piece of twine or a rag dry.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	Then remove it carefully from these dusts impregnated with wine and oil so that it does not develop pus.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you remove the water and see that the pus has already diminished, then know that it is necessary to prepare a paste from two parts of flour and four parts of colophony and mix them together, and let it be made into a plaster and applied to these blisters to the naked flesh.
Capitol .vi.	De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	Of the cure of water that cats in the ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	All causes that cats in the ears are of four species, that is either mineral and similar to mineral, namely iron and lead, or plant and similar to plant, namely thistle and favus, or fluid and similar to fluid, namely water and vinegar, and their similar things, or some animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And so when mineral cats in the ear or any other cause similar to these causes that do not fit and you doubt about the ear, then place the ear on the shoulder, and if the cat persists, then distill in that cause of olive oil or vinegar, and then administer its extract, and make it sneeze with a condiment, and follow it with a warm napkin.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	Then place on the circuit of the ear some pieces of cloth or wool, and extend the ear to the sides, for the motas seen is froghous with these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not froghous, then administer an extract of him with the instrument called a gentle tweezers, whose this form is:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it is froghous with the tweezers, it is good; otherwise, administer the extract of him with a little amount of double-boiled oil.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And so if it is not froghous with water, then make a tube of aram and insert the end of the tube in the opening of the ear and close it around the tube with wax and soft oil so that it is not open but the tube.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	Then extract it with a strong pull, for ten seen are froghous with water that we have told.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	Then if it is not froghous in this way, then take a piece of string or twine or a piece of cloth and wrap it around the ear gently.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	Then insert it into the opening of the ear with ease, and then dry the ear from its moisture.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And so if it is not froghous with all the causes that we have told, then you cut off what prevents it from developing pus or spasms.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the way of cutting that off is to sanctify the patient of the vein of the head and extract it from the third time according to the virtue of him, and then place it on its sides, and open the ear with a little slit in the middle of the ear, and turn the ear around.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	Then let the slit be of lunar form that reaches the pus, and if the pus is stuck, remove it with an appropriate instrument; then sew the slit in that hour with speed, and cure it within.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause that cats in the ear is one of the greases that they grow and it is inflated, then administer the cure and extract it; but if it does not respond to you by sneezing, then take a sponge of twine slightly according to this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	And administer to it the removal of that grease that is caught in the ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not let it fall water when you think that it is already moistened by the ear vapor, and then remove it with pieces of cloth or a gentle tweezers, or extract it in this way: for it is relieved by removing it.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	Then in the ear water that enters into the ear, be aware that the patient uses sneezing with a condiment at the beginning, and fill his ear with a little cloth, and if it is not froghous by this water, it is good; otherwise, take two small peals and double-boil them, and make those peals hard, and when they are hard, place one of them in the opening of the ear and make it jump from the other side with a little peal.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Then do not stop until all the water has been drained.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc .i., e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And as soon as the water has been drained, take paper or a cloth, i.e., place one end of it in his ear and extend the other end towards the fire until it burns.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And then put the other cloth and make as many holes as needed until all the water has been drained, and then place it over the area where the pain is.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	If the pain is in the ear due to a small object, then insert and remove it quickly; however, if it is caused by something of greater size that has lodged within the ear canal, administer the treatment with force and precision, and this pain is less severe than all the other causes that can cause pain in the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	If the pain is due to an earworm, and you have not yet explained the treatment mentioned in the previous section, then when treating it, make sure to keep the ear away from sunlight.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if there is any cause of earworms, then extract it with force or precision; however, if no cause appears, take a thin tube-like object and remove the wax with it:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And then insert the thin end into the ear according to the amount of wax it suffers; and then suck strongly with a firm hand, and make drops of water appear; until all the worms have been expelled.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	However, if you do not obey the instruction to wait, then you will have to try again; repeat the treatment with wax as mentioned above; and then refer to the treatment of worms in the ear from the distillation section.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And be it your effusion with which you pour the medicinal oils into the ear using this instrument, whose shape is as follows:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	make it thin, and have a small hole at one end, and place it on the ear.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And so that it fits nicely into the cavity of the canal where it is necessary to insert.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you wish, take a string and wrap it nicely around the end; and then pour oil into the cavity of the ear - or, in this case, the ear - and insert the string into it, and grasp your hand firmly over it to prevent the oil from flowing out; and then place the string into the ear canal, and with a gentle press, let the oil flow into the cavity and relieve the earache.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And if it is already partially inserted into the ear, burn it slightly with fire.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	Be careful that the cause you are distilling in the ear is not too sensitive, because ear medicine does not tolerate heat well.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	Of treatment of earache.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Some small holes in the ears of some older people do not perforate, and this happens sometimes in men due to illness or flesh wound; and this earache is caused by a plug in the ear canal, which does not allow for movement of the eardrum, and in some cases it is at the outer edge.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	That which occurs at the edge does not allow for movement of the eardrum and is in difficult conditions to heal.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in that ear in which you can move the eardrum, be careful not to touch the ear of the patient towards the sun and look into it.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if there is a blockage that appears, open it with a small instrument, whose shape is as follows:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the end of the instrument is small in width, whose one edge is sharp and the other not; and the blade is made up of two thin edges so that it does not hurt the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And if the blockage is by hidden flesh in the ear or in the meat, then extract it with a very thin blade, and cut it with a swift and easy motion so that all the hidden flesh is removed.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the blockage is at the edge of the ear, take a thin blade and burn it slightly with fire; then place it into the ear canal.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And if you feel that the earache is caused by a blockage that can be removed easily, do so with ease; and be careful not to irritate the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then place a cloth of the second kind over the ear, according to the amount of width the string you wrapped has; and make drops of water appear over the ear for several days in a row; or take some, sprinkle it on the affected part, and use oil; and if there is an earache, then apply the oil to help relieve it. And if the ear is already swollen, be careful not to disturb the wound.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	However, if there is bleeding due to the earache, then dip a sponge or cloth in water and place it on the ear; and administer the treatment that stops the bleeding, which is described in the distillation section.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	Of treatment of earache with an ointment.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	These are the causes of earache with an ointment. Some are wet, and some are dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	And if you have those that cause earache with an ointment, and cut them into small pieces; then place them onto the affected parts.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	If there is bleeding due to earache, then you must cauterize those with a small sharp knife.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	The best cauterization is to cut those very small and, when all the causes of their razor-like edges are gone, they will not return and will be burned without returning.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Treatment for large earaches that occur in the eyelids of men.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Some small objects become stuck to the eyelids of men, which is built up and becomes stronger and tougher; and the larger it grows, the more difficult it is to remove.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	It is accumulation of thick moisture on the lower eyelid and then on the upper eyelid.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	The operation is that you should consider if the larger object is attached to it, whether it appears from the eyelid and is removed completely; and the cause of it is avoided.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Then break that open with a small instrument, and cut it into small pieces with ease; then hang those pieces from a string, and let them dangle freely.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	If you are not prepared for the beginning of this operation, do not put your hand into the ear until you have cut it open slightly; otherwise, you will not find any cause.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the wound is large, then join it with a suture; and heal that wound.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	If it is small, do not worry about it for that wound will heal on its own, and the blood will bring healing.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	If the larger one is falling towards the inner edge of the eyelid, then open the eyelid and hang it from a string, and let it dangle freely; otherwise, you will not find any cause.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	Then clean that hand with salt water; and heal the wound with oil within it, so that it heals well.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	From the cure of the upper eyelid of the eye.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Axcirnah is grays the qual is engendrat in the tunics of the eyelid above, and most often in children, it aggravates the eyes and causes their catarrh; and they cannot look at the brightness of the sun because tears gather there.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And so you can keep them on their faces all the time, and they sleep on their faces; and their eyebrows are already wet with inflammation, and there is an increase in the appearance of pimples on them; and when you press the area, you feel the swelling inside them.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And another manner of operation is in those who the patient keeps their head on their chest, and they place a drape over them and a circle according to the quantity which contains arthernach from all sides, and they place that over this one and press the fingers in saying "toes" so that it is added arcernac into the center of the circle, and then put in the center of this humidity with a spatula entering through the width, and the width does not exceed the width which is made by flapotomy.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	May also in the preon cover that you open the entire cord, since in the upper positions processes arcernach through a groove according to the shape of white grayce.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Therefore remove that with the drapes which you have wrapped between the fingers said at the sides in front and twist between the right and left hands until it is completely removed.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And keep that from entering into the groove so that you don't get to the eye and turn away this one.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	May if your arcernach does not appear at the beginning of the groove, rather you adjust in the groove a small thing so that it processes arcernach; and then remove this one as we have said; and then return drapes to him in water and oil and place them on the area and rub those with dust.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And so that they mix salt and they place that in the cavity of the groove so that what is left of this humidity.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that within that is healed.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	May if it occurs in the area an inflammation of the skin, then cure that with plasters of cerate within that is healed.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	Of ways to treat the eye.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When in the eyelids of the eyes are born by the adjustments of the natural pels and are old, then those to the eye and cause ways of illnesses thus with tears frequent and softening of the eyelids and membrane within that is the cause of destruction of the eye which is called tacinir of the eye, and it is cured in four ways: or per cauterium by fire; or by acute medicine according to what has been said before in the chapter on cauterium; or it is done atactin through incision and suture; or by cannas according to that it sees.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And therefore you keep the head of the patient in your right hand; turn the eyelid of the eye to your left hand, and if it turns, it is good; and if not, insert a needle into that in which it is faithful from the sides of the eyelid, and let it enter the needle through that one, and so— next to the margin of the eyelid where there are no pels— next to the pels, and pull the thread up to the sides with the eyelid, and turn that to the right.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And then put in the edge within the eyelid of pels adjusted to the spatula entering through the lacrimal major next to the lacrimal mendre; and then remove the thread and leave it on the eyelid with dusts small of cot or of drap, and then tie it up on the eyelid with a knot, and so be thus with a figure of a leaf.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	But nonetheless it is the figure according to the quantity of helevacio of the eyelid, since that has already been diversified in men, since those whose eyelids are molified by a large amount according to the amount with which the eyelid is softened.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And then put in the spatula on the two lines that you have outlined, and begin from the lacrimal major next to the lacrimal menor.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your groove is next to the natural pels thus with it is the thickness of the king.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And then place the wax in one of the two angles of the cord, and then scrape that completely, and then adjust with the knife the two lips with a thin thread or wool, and then wipes off the blood, and makes adhere what is superfluous of the threads on the two eyebrows for some mysterious reasons, if you want to do so, and otherwise, do not cure.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And then leave the suture of the threads within three days or four, and then cure that.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you want, leave the suture of six sutures, and cure that with water that dries and hardens, since the eyelid is raised by the seal of the suture and the aggregation of it; but six sutures are better. And therefore I have said about the ancient ways of treating.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	But nonetheless in him is sollicited on the head, and it is a good operation, and it is not in fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And it is another way in تاکmir, and it is that you outline on the eyelid a figure thus with a leaf, and then raise the eyelid with three separate and gathered nails according to this form:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	May if it is not possible there, have the nails, and since it is not wrapped, then take a needle in which there is thread and put that in the center of the figure, and insert the other needle next to the lacrimal major, and the thread according to next to the lacrimal mendre, and adjust the threads between the fingers said with equality, and then lift up the whole cord on the side which is outlined thus with the have described above.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the two lips of the wound with a suture, and cure that within that is healed.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	May if it occurs an inflammation of the skin due to your incision or your groove, then that inflammation with cerat and similar things, and wet it.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	In some cases the pels of the eyelid are converted, so that when you use in that of the incision; but the suture is more artificial.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	Tاکimir with cannas is according to this form:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	And if there is no way to cure the eye, nor a way to comfort it, and so leave it without treatment. And that you convert the eyelid and divide the figure within that I have outlined according to what I have said; and then by art make two needles or two thin stars of the length which is the length of the eyelid and its width be next to the width of the spatula.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	You have already outlined in the edges of any parts, where you have the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Then add some of the threads with subtlety under the eyelid of the eye, and constrict the needles of any parts with a strong closure, and leave that for some days, since the cord by the stricture will die and rot, and so it will not be able to close.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	May if it is delayed, then cut the thread with the tweezers, and then cure that within that is healed.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	So it is fixed, the eyelid is raised and the pels do not poke.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the form of two needles which you will make according to this form:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and it has neither a quantity of length nor a quantity of breadth more or less.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	Of the raising of nails with the awl when the nail is hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When the nails are not natural, hard, and sharp, then perform the operation in a careful manner: take a fine needle, place it at the tip of the soft sinew, and adjust the ends carefully, without making a mark.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And let the length of the threads be of a quantity corresponding to one palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	Then take another fine thread and tie it in a knot, and cut off the ends, if you wish.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	Then place the patient's head on your lap and position yourself so that the light falls on your work; for the operation is subtle and delicate.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	Then insert the needle into the root of the nail with care; let it penetrate the eyelid swiftly so that you remove it from the natural nail.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	Then pull out the nail and insert it into the eye; let there be one, two, or three, not more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	Then take your hand away from the patient's eye so that the nail is removed with the lid attached; let it not be separated from the natural nail.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	If the lid is separated from the nail, then take the lid to another place by means of the thread attached to it; let it not be separated from the nail above.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	Then let the person look at the nail; if the lid has been separated, then take the thread and cut off the ends of it; let it not be attached to the nail above for two or three days, so that the nail may heal well and good flesh grow on it.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	If the nail is loose, then adjust a long nail from among the natural nails; let it be raised with that, or let it remain in place until it has been adjusted; then let it be raised.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	Of the treatment of the eye which is inside the eyelid.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When the eye is affected with a bulging which is caused by a contraction of the eyelid into it, or to the right or left side, because of an ill-founded inflammation or section or cauterization, and this is called leukoma, and this leukoma is either natural or accidental, and is produced by an inflammation or section or cauterization, or by a similar resemblance to its malady.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Then the manner of performing the operation is that you open that consolidation and separate the eyelids from each other; place a piece of linen between them and bind them together so that they remain in that position until they are healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	Do not use any treatment of the eye for the causes which dry it out and contract it; for if you make it wet, you will increase the pain rather than lessen it while there is fire on it.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use on it of remedies which soften it in the case of a fever, with fenugrec, and bathe it with warm water in which there is salt or a liquid oil, and dip the pad in it, and treat with that.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	The treasure of your treatment is that you should not apply any remedy to a consolidated eye according to the way in which it was burning at the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	This operation which we have described is nothing but a correction of a bulging which does not return the form of the eye according to how it was burning before.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	Of the treatment of a bulging which is caused by a contraction of the eyelid on the inside.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This remedy which is applied to a bulging on the inside of the eyelid, which is called an acromedical remedy; and it is either natural or accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	It may be accidental because of a swelling or section or cauterization or by any similar resemblance.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	And the way to perform the operation is that you take a fine needle which has double thread on it, and let it pass through the lacrimal bone from the left side into the right, so that the thread reaches the two ends of the bone.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	Then stretch out the bone at its ends by means of the needle and cut it with the blade, and mark it with a wide spatula.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	Then, if the eyelid returns to its form when it is bent, it is good; otherwise, take a thread and fix it in the division of the two eyelids, and turn them towards each other, and make the two slits in the middle of the eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	Then let the ends of the two slits meet at two angles of the incision, which have been made so that they meet, and may be formed into a figure by their convergence.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is the Greek letter alpha: A.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	Then fix the bone by the amount corresponding to the width of it on either side of the eyelid, so that it sews the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	Then adjust those parts which are separated and stitch them together with a woolen thread; then treat those with water which we have spoken of as being soft, and with fomentation, so that they may be healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	If the bulging or section or cauterization is to be treated by a slit or stitch or cauterization, then, if it is necessary to make a flat slit according to what has been said before,
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	Then separate the two eyelids according to what we have spoken of.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the addition of the speech of the treatment which is applied to a bulging on the inside or outside of the eyelid, which may be performed in the manner of a remedy, and that is done with various kinds of remedies;
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	The expert should always prepare himself in any way which is possible for him to cause the return of the form to its natural form, or near to it, and the operation and instruments in the best possible conditions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	Of the Adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation occurs in those who are in a fever, and the edge of the eyelid is stuck to the membrane which is on the inside of the eye, and the movement of it is prevented; then, when you introduce the tip of the needle between the eyelid and the membrane, lift it up, or extend it towards the upper lid.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	Then you cut the adhesion with a fine blade; which should not be sharp at the edges of the incisions, taking care that the thread does not catch the edge of the blade so as not to disturb the operation, and leaving the spatula which does not injure the eye by its keenness.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And let your incision remove that adhesion with ease so that the eyelid may be returned to its natural form, and all adhesion be healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	Then take to the eye salt water which you wash with; or distill in it Zuni's water which is dissolved in water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	Then separate the eyelid from the eye with a calk; let it rest on wool infused with the album of an egg, and then use the third day because of consolidation causes so that they may be healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	Of Incisions in the ungul and the prominence of the lacrimal bone.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Know that the ungul is according to two ways; either it is nervous, and it is similar to hard ciphac (substance) which is soft; or it is not nervous, and it is similar to white ice which, when it melts, takes with it the thread to which it has been attached, and then it falls off.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both of these spices do not begin to be cooked until the tear duct has been reached, which slowly and steadily covers the eye and prevents light and movement of the eyes.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	The way of working in the incision is that the patient should sit with his head between your knees, and then open the eyelids, raise the eyelid to your hand, and collect the eyelash with some double-sided tape and extend it at the edge.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And take an needle and insert it into that with a hair of horse or cow or goat, or fur, or double the end of the needle little by little and leave that in the middle of the lash, and pierce it with the needle through the eye; then tie that with thread, and extend that at the edges, and remove those hairs from the edge, and cut off those hairs at the edge where the pupil is.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	Then you should continue doing this with the hair inside the eye.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And then you should cut the root of the tear duct with a thin scalpel or small scissors, and let the natural tears flow without interruption through that incision.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And sometimes the lash is extended with a single thread or thread, and then you should cut it with a lion's scalpel, whose shape is this:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	Keep in mind that you do not touch the corneal membrane with the scalpel, and that the rupture does not occur on the pupil, and that the pupil is punctured.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Then the incision should get into the eye a little salt mixed with fine sand, and leave that inside for another day; then wash those eyes with water so that they are healed.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	If the lash is not nervous and you cannot put the needle in, or if it does not stick to the thread, then these kinds of lashes are cured with medicines, and are healed in this way with eye and treatment in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	If you want to cut that hair, then open the patient' eyes and take a lion' sharp scalpel following this form:
am subtilitat.	with subtlety.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	If that hair is rarefied and contracted and enters the eye, then distill it from your own oil in the eye with a fine thread or salt, and wash those eyes inside out for another day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	Then repeat the operation on that hair until all of it is removed, but if any remains, then cut that out with a scalpel, for you should leave that, and at the beginning heal the cut within it, so that it is healed.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	Then repeat your operation on that hair with reason until it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The removal of the tear membrane, if it is a great harm to the eye, should be suspended with thread; and cut that hair from one edge, and do not finish the incision so that the tears do not flow.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	Then distill in the tear membrane a fine thread or salt until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	Of incisions of algorings and of water that is born from adjusted flesh in the eye.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Some of the veins in the eyelids are born with flesh that is red, and it is placed next to the pupil so that it covers it, or it is brought closer or further from the eye, and presses the eyelids together at the edges, and is joined by a knot of thread.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	The operation in it is that the patient should sit with his head between your knees, and then open the eyelids, and collect all that hair with some scissors convenient to water, and wash that water with one forceps or a basket; and then cut off that hair at the beginning until it is completely finished with the incision, and be careful of the eye that does not rub it, so that your operation is complete.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And be the incision that you cut those or with a scalpel whose shape we have described in the incision of the eyelash, or with small scissors with which it is collected according to the form of that scalpel that corresponds to this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Therefore, when your incision is complete and all that flesh has been removed, then fill the eye with salt, or distill in it powder that tastes red and similar to the corrosive medicines, and place over the edge a bandage with a patch of wool, so that it is secured from the cut by a knot.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	If there is any cause of algorings and it is serious, and you fear an apoplexy, then leave that eye and heal the apoplexy with water, and then repeat the operation on that hair until it is healed, and set that cut flesh in the eye of this kind.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	But above all, you should know that you remove any cure of the eye by means of fire, and do not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that the member is suffering from that operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	Of gathering of flesh on the eye.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Such veins are red and do not allow the operation to be performed, and the eye heals with the length of days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore, it is necessary at the beginning that you consider whether the eye in which the flesh is gathered is strong and in which there is not another illness than that flesh, then collect that flesh.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And it is that you order the patient to sit with his head between your knees, and suspend those veins with one thread or two according to your prudence; and let that thread be a double one according to this form:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or so two threads in a knot according to this form:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And then those veins are gathered with fine scissors, with subtlety, and you wash the blood every hour or two, so that those veins are dried up on the eye and are rolled over.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	Keep in mind that you do not rub the eye with the edge of the scalpel; and if your operation is in the morning before noon, and be firm in your operation so that you do not cut those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	When you have finished, then distill in the eye a fine green or red to cause the corrosion that heals it from the gathered flesh.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	If water is not possible for you to collect all of it in an hour, and then you should fill it with the amount that can be collected, and let it stand for several days so that it is dried up, and secure it from the cut by a knot.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	Then repeat the same method until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	This is the shape of the scissors:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	Of reducing of aridity to the nose.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you cure aridity with a hot cauterization or acute medicine according to what precedes it in the narrative and is not healed, then do not let that enter into it but extract all the moisture that exists in it, and let the dust escape from it so that the bone is exposed.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And therefore, when the bone is exposed and becomes corrupted or black, then you should use an instrument whose shape is this:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	It is called a sharp cap, and is made of iron, and is filed with a file or rubbed with a file according to the following shape.
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	Then place that over the damaged location of the bone, and turn it between your fingers, and press your hand little by little until you know that the corruption is smooth.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	It is made smooth with a few drops of water, and then restores the place with causative and strictive agents.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	So that the location is consolidated and it is in good flesh hidden from the scythe and it separates the body from the sania and remains for 30 days, and does not renew itself nor does it pus, and does not happen to him an accident, then you know that he has healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And if not, then do not let it become engorged, but reduce the fracture to the form of the nose, and according to this method: that you discover by second os am ferr or am medicina acuta, and with care uncover the os, then you take according to this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	The tip of the iron is triangular, and the furrow of the iron is first weakened at the end, as often as necessary.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	Then place that above the bone, and that is close to the lacrimal; and lengthen your hand a little from the hilt, and place your hand on the tribe within so that it enters all the bone, and that feels pain for assault that it sends up through all of its parts, and does not come out.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Then restore the location with stenous medicines drying it out as often as you wash him.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Then when the flesh at the location is hardened, then the substance that was flowing out from the fissure returns to the nose, so it is a lighter pus over the patient.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter .XX.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	Of reducing the prominence of the hilt.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the hilt emerges in its totality and does not happen to him an accident or a decrease, then you know that you have loosened the patient, and follow according to this method: and place air on the throat with gentle breathing and sucking for good sucking; and place oil over the hilt with made-up powder, and strengthen the plaster on the hilt with fine powder.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the method of the powders is that you take sheepskin cloth made from lions' hair, and each cloth be doubled four times; and make these clothes into powder.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And place those one above the other according to the quantity that the hilt needs.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And strengthen those above each other with a sturdy and tight cloth; and repeat the air with gentle breathing and sucking for good sucking; and place the air and leave the hilt stretched over the day and the night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	But if in the meantime the ligament is softened, then you know that it should be tight.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And hold the ligament close to the day and the night as often as necessary.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if the hilt has already been reduced, then good, and if not, then repeat the plaster with the powders and the tightness and the air within so that it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter.XXI.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	Of the incision of the prominence of the eyelid.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When there is a disruption in the eyelid, and it is prominent and comes out of place, then cut the eyelids as often as necessary with a sharp razor; it is fitting for the form of man through it, and wants to cut it, then perform the operation within so that it has been mentioned, that you introduce the needle into the root of the eyelid from the part of the lacrimal, and let it enter according to its disposition; and then cut the place of the double thread and take it with the same needle of the other part, and make it come out through the first hole according to its position, and strengthen that one.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	And then take the needle and place it on the hilt wetted with wool infused with egg white, and let it remain within so that it comes out through the eye according to its position, and strengthen it.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then heal the hilt with water that comforts him within so that the plague is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And in some cases of all parts, with a circle of cloth is adjusted to the prominence of the hilt, and let it be pierced by the fine blade that reaches the front of the hilt, and run the watery pus, and lower the hilt and enter so quickly.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And strengthen it within so that it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter.XXII.
De curacio de alconati.	Of the treatment of eyes.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This evil called alconta is not but a disease that is adjusted in the hilt resembling falling water and it is not that one.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	But the way of working in it is that you make the patient lie on his back and face up, and take your cap on two sides of it, and place those over so that the eye reaches the parts from which the disease comes, and let it dry, and do not let it come down, and keep the light, and the patient sees the causes as often as possible.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not come down in the lower parts, you know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	But if it is not prepared for the descent of the disease with water that we have mentioned, then make the patient lie on his side and take a fine blade and place it on the part about the panniculus cernent a small devés the continuation of the conjunctiva with the cornea in the crown (in front of the eye) within so that it is removed.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Then, when it is removed, you distil in the hilt water tail into which you have mixed honey or water in which you have already built fenugrec and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And let it be healed with the other causes within so that it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter.XXII.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	Of the treatment of the water that descends from the hilt.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already mentioned the spices of the water in the division and what it convents to pierce with the blade declaring, then do according to health.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Then you know that you make the patient lie on his side on a table and place the hilt in its position, and keep it firm.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And place your hand next to the eyelid of the hilt with your left hand, if the water is in the hilt on the left side; or with your right hand, if the water is in the hilt on the right side.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And place your right hand behind the hilt, if the hilt is on the left side; or your left hand behind it, if the hilt is on the right side.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And place the end of the hilt next to the crown for the thickness of the blade in the eyelid on the inner part, and place the almagda with skill and turn your hand towards it.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And pierce into the hilt's album and feel that the almagde has already reached the cause of the vision.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	Then you know that the measure of the path of almagde to the front of the hilt is the measurement of the space from the pupil within to the end of the blackness, and it is the crown of the hilt; for you see that pupil with the vision of the eye through the clarity of the eyelid cornea.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And place the almagde within the hilt in the place where the water descends, and then throw another blade towards the other side, and if the water descends quickly, then wash the patient with it quickly, and almagde in his hilt.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And wait a little; then if the water descends, then you stop that other blade before the almagde is removed.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	Then when it is dry and does not come down, then you extract almagde easily, and turn it a little at a time, and dissolve a little clear salt from the gem in water and wash the hilt within; and place the hilt outside of the cloth or stop or wool infused with rosewater and egg white, and keep the eye clean.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	But these are things that only belong to our time, resting on that one with the top trisseled with rosewater.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if you do not obey your almagde to the hilt because of its hardness--for some men the hilt is hard from nature, then know that you take the blade which is called alabaster and this is its form:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And so pierce that connection, and do not stop your hand in the wound, and there is no need for you to push the blood out of the place.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	Then introduce the needle second as we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And you must compliment on your work, a patient is prepared in the sleeping room like this, so that he sleeps on his back in a dark house, and all movements are prohibited.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	Then pause the flow of urine so that it is liquid in nature, and do not tickle his head to the left or right.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And the operation according to its disposition within three days.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	Then remove that one in that dark room and examine the vision carefully, and return the operation within seven days.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	Do not add that you should make water at the time of the cure or even less add an infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	While avoiding that you should add water, for it leaves the urine in great quantity and violently with regard to the patient.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	If there is any fever after three days, then if you remove that bandage in front of the foot on the seventh day, and correct that wound with water which gives fever.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Then you have cleaned his face and put it over his mouth for the purpose of keeping his breath away for a few days, he exists in the dark room.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And let that patient get up gradually from that bed and speak about their causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And you know that in surgery it is not allowed to have a blind sight, and then you are diligent about the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And we have already reached some of those who are in the art of surgery, and some said that they made fire in the Airac by piercing it with a needle, and water was drawn out.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	But as to the use of water in our country, it has not been perfected yet, nor is it known that water was taken from the ancient books or from the ancestors' practice; and it may be new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	These are the forms of the medicines that you should do to those who don't know them:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	The are made of iron itself, and the ends of their needles are triangular, the acute tip is also like that, and this is the form.
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter 24.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	Of the cure for a nose wound.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When in the nose there are various kinds of meat, adjusted for different causes, which is assembled with a weight of pain, or it is a polyps because it resembles that peys represented.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And from it comes cancerous meat, a bone, of a dark color; and from it comes lion's meat, not of a dark color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Then in that one which is not fraudulent or cancerous from those lions' meat, you must make points between his toes, and put the needle on them, and pierce the skin of him, and cut the flesh with a sharp knife.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	Then remove that one from between the toes, and cut off with a sharp knife what you have understood of it with a thin blade from one part to another until you know that all the meat has been removed; and if by chance there is any reason why the removal is possible, then remove that water with a sharp tool from him easily.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	If the patient has a high fever or chills with an apostema, then you should pause that water which is coming; or if it is from malicious apostemas, then you should cut and cauterize that one within that there are no openings.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	Then remove that one with a sharp incision, and water or vinegar.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	If the nose bleeds and you see moisture coming out of the palate, then you know that it is already healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	If the moisture does not penetrate as far as it should, then you know that inside him there is no meat in the upper bones of the nose where there has been no removal.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Then introduce the needle firmly into the one who has any grossness, and suck it up with the thumb, and pause between each nut the amount of water or less, and place the needle on the nose with the point or another reason that is possible to do it.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	Then when the water has come out, and the smell of it has entered into the nose channels, and has been thrown over his nose, because ten times more sight has been given to the children in school, and there is no cause for that one who wants to do it.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	Then pause the two extremities of the needle, one that comes out over the nose and the other that comes in the nose, and pause the thread of meat on those nuts which are in the needle's point, and water comes out that you know that the meat has already come out.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	Then remove the needle, and pause in the nose the abscission of a single hair, and water comes out for three days or more within that it is rustling meat.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	Then at the end of the cause, pause in the nose a tube of lead for the sake of days within that it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	If you know of any cure that works, use that one.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the medicine that cleans and makes liquid in the nose:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	Make water of silver or iron, which is like a small lamp lit, so with a little ring, and the meat resembling in shape.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	If you want, make a closed tube like this with a cane, and the tube of the medicine-making instrument is flat and open; to which you should have that one when you squeeze oil or water out of it, or out of its juice and of the causes you can use it.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	These are the ingredients of a good medicine: honey from beavers, white balsam, ginger, yellow pepper, sage, and oak sap. Make a syrup of blood and cow's milk, and make pills from that syrup, and give one pill with water to the patient who is asleep; and put those pills in the nose of the patient while he sleeps.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	Of the nose wounds at the ends.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	A wound in the tips of the nose is a great and painful thing to do in several days within which motion comes out from it.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And with water that you should cut off that one at the beginning of its appearance, and suck out all of it.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	Then place over the wound or cauterize or apply a burning medicine which is in the same place as that one.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	If the patient's incision is delayed within that it is great, then consider if it is hard and of a dark color and has little feeling, then do not touch that one with iron because it is an apostema of old age; for the sake of that one which you have cut out through the great evil over him.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	If the apostema is of a lion's touch and not of a dark color, and when an incision can be made in all of it, then remove that one with fear and cure the wound with water that comes out and applies a counterirrent within that it is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	Of the nose suture, and of the lips and of the ear when the continuity is dissolved by plague or by similarity.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	You know that when this one happens to solve the continuity of any of these cartridges, it is not done in that operation, but in some men.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	So you see, whenever any of these causes occurs and you consider it to be a fresh plague, then you should adjust the two lips of the wound with suture, and then cure what is inside to make it heal.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the lips of cure of continuity are already separated and each is made whole, then you should know that you should cut off any piece of its cord that appears inside so it doesn't become infected.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then adjust the two lips with suture and strengthen them, and over them sprinkle dragon's blood and triple- Strengthened (insult), and place over the powder a thin piece of plaster of gold, or of some other of the consolidating plasters, and leave it there for two days or three, then remove it and replace that plaster and cure what is inside to make it heal.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	The way of sewing is that you add the cure of continuity or with needles as we have already described in sewing the belly, or you add the cure of continuity with gold as well, so that it should be known.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter .xxvii.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	Of the Extraction of What Causes Come in the Two Lips in the Separations Inside.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	There are various types of infections that can occur in the two lips inside the separations: small warts resembling little pieces of flesh, and some of them are small and some are large.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	And if you should convert the lips and open up each of those dureties completely, then you should fill in the place with dragon's blood three times so that the plague is restricted, and then you should wash it with vinegar and cure the place with water that is styptic, so that it should heal.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter.xxviii.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	Of the cutting of the flesh adapted to the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	A large number of small white warts can be found on the adapted flesh to the gums, so that if you should suspend it with a string or have it placed in a container and cut it into pieces, then let it run away or let the blood flow.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	And then place over the area dragon' s blood three times or other stypic or caustic powders.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if that flesh returns, then you should cut it again secondarily, and cauterize it, because the cauterization will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter.xxix.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	Of Reason for Teeth with Iron.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When in the surface of the teeth in the separations inside and in the forehalves and between the gums are adapted rough scales, some are black and some are yellow or green inside the gum, and the teeth themselves break off.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And whenever you should file between your teeth and place the top of the foot on the leg, then chisel out those scales and causes resembling sand before they become too dark or yellow or green, so that the blackness and yellowness and other colors are removed from them before they become too much.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	Then if that water is in those at the beginning of the reason, then it is not; and if not, then you should repeat the reason over those at another day and again and again until you arrive at the last statement where you want to stop.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And you should know that the teeth require different types of instruments and shapes according to how they are prepared for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And because the razor used to make the tooth's separation inside is different from the razor used to file between teeth according to other shapes, those forms of razors are always prepared for you to see soon:
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter.xxx.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	Of Teeth Eradication.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	Then you should cure the tooth from its pain and delay it completely in the eradication of it, because there is no cause that replaces the substance of it when it is eradicated, because it is a sublimated substance that is excusable in the eradication of it.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	But whenever the foot is forced to eradicate that tooth, then firmly you should certify yourself as to which tooth hurts, because the pain of the foot disconcerts and hinders you from doing it in a healthy tooth, and then you eradicate that one and the pain does not cease until the painful tooth is eradicated as well, for we have already seen this by operation of the toes.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Then you should certify yourself as to which tooth hurts, and you know it well, then whenever you should scarify in the circuit of that tooth with a sharp knife so that there is no virtue left, until it is dissolved from the gum completely at the beginning, and then cut it little by little with a delicate pair of scissors until it becomes very small.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And then bind in a strong cloth with a good knot or a sharp object, and place the top of the foot between the toes that you have placed on one side so that it does not hurt, and then take the tooth out secondarily in a way that it is not broken, nor does the pain of the foot cause.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And if it is not a forehawled tooth, then take one of those instruments, and put that under the gum completely with ease and try to remove it in the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	But if the tooth is broken or corroded, then whenever you should wrap that tooth with a thread and tie it tightly at the end of the thread, and then take it out little by little in the way that it does not break in your hand's grasp during the time of its contraction on that one.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And whenever you should open completely for the scarification in the circuit of the gum completely and keep your strength so that it does not break and repair the separation of it, and return to the foot for its malice that is less than the first pain of it.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And keep in mind that you should not file with those barbers in their final stage and audacity on the eradication of them, for we have already described this; because there are those large teeth-removing men that are more difficult to be broken than the ones that are cut off, and all of their roots entirely, or some of them, or you extract that one with some bones of the mandible in such a way as has been reported by some.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And then the eradication of it should be washed with vinegar or vinegar in salt water.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if there is a flow of blood from the tooth like rain, then whenever you should cut a little quantity of cheese and sprinkle it over the wound, and if that does not stop the bleeding, then cauterize it.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The shape of the tweezers and forceps is delicate for the tooth to be removed at the beginning is of a long handle, a short handle, and a large grasp, so that they are not doubled when acting with them.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And be like this whenever you start working with those handles so that they are not doubled, they are short ends.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And they are forged of iron from the right side and the ends are forged of steel, and in the ends of those is found a tooth that intren the other teeth and comes out by a contraction, and some of the ends of them are the shape of the beak of a dove that has no ciconia, so it is sharp, and they are very strong to contract.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter.xxxi.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	Of the Eradication of Teeth and the Disintegration of Bones of the Mandibles that are Broken.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	Then whenever you should stop the tooth that is broken from causing a certain reason, then you should pause over the place with a cloth for a day or two until the place becomes soft; and then apply a kind of glue to the ends of those that are assembled together like the beak of a dove called ciconia or guanta, the shape of the tweezers:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The extremities of their hands were wrapped inside so with linen or wool.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if you do not obey to pull them up with these forceps or hold them, then remember that you cover the root and separate all the meat and introduce the instrument which has this name, for its shape is this:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And of thick leather a small one, and it should not be wrapped up so that it does not become wrinkled.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	Therefore if the root is torn out by water, it is good; and if not, help you with these other instruments of which these are the shapes: the shape of the first instrument is triangular at the end, in which there is some thickness:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The shape of the second instrument is that it should be triangular and its smaller end should be sharp.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And you are helped with these instruments, having two ramps of which this is the form close to the following:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	And with other instruments that will be needed in shaving teeth; for this tool is made like an apple and its form is this:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	of the triangular end bent or short, which has some thickness, and it should not be wrapped up so that it does not become wrinkled.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And you know that the tools for teeth are like the others instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	May the artisan be wise and skilled in this art, he will understand how to operate and treat different illnesses; for they are diseases which the ancient did not know or pause their own instruments for the forms of different species.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the jawbone or other bones of the mouth are broken or crushed, then it is necessary to be careful in that place with the water which is convenient for them of the instruments and of the forceps which we spoke about when extracting the roots of teeth; and help yourself with these actions whose form is this:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And it should be in some small thickness from little to little, and should be tied up or held on the mouth so that it does not escape or flee until the bone is completely torn out; then restore the place with medicines suitable for water.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If in the bone is small fracture, then he cuts off that part of the fracture and its blackness, and heals it within so that it is cured.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter LII.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	Of the treatment of prominent teeth compared to others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When prominent teeth are not in line with their natural course according to the shape of them, and most when they protrude toward the females, and especially the older ones; then remember that you consider: if a tooth is not next to another tooth, and it cannot be removed or oiled with it, then cut it out; but if it is annexed to another tooth, then you separate it with this instrument whose form is similar to the morra of pig, and is made from Indian iron of sharp end.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And it should be your incision which you will make in two days because of the hardness of the tooth, and that it is not connected to any other teeth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if a prominent tooth is being removed by grinding, then grind it with the Indian iron which has this shape:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And it should all be of Indian iron and its margin is rounded; and it should have points that are made with the knife according to the form of needles, with which the tooth is ground little by little in two days with ease, so that no other tooth is connected to it and it falls out.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	Then tie up that part in a loop, and cut it off with razor blades.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	If the tooth has one part that is broken and it causes the tongue to be caught, then remember that you grind off that part of the root where the roughness of that fraction is caught, and it is made thin so that the tongue does not get caught or the word gets corrupted.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter LIII.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	Of the restoration of broken teeth with gold or silver wire.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When the teeth are injured or moved by impact or impact, and the patient cannot bear water that burns, and you have treated it with stipulative medicines, and your treatment has not been successful, then remember that they do not get infected because they are tied up with gold wire and not with silver, for silver becomes green and disintegrates after a certain time; but gold does not change.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And be the wire in such fineness and thickness according to the amount that can enter between the teeth; and the form of the cut is that you take the wire and make it twice as long between two healthy teeth, and you wrap it around two bent parts of the wire between two broken teeth, or if one or both are broken, until the thread reaches the healthy tooth on the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And then repeat the same process to the other part of which you started; and tighten your knot with ease and skill until it is not too tight.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And tie it up with a knot that holds the wire to the roots of the teeth so that they do not move away.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And you cut off the excess ends of the wire with forceps or tweezers; and add them in any place with actions, and hide them between a healthy tooth and a broken tooth, so that they do not damage the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And then let it lie there stretched out with a string.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	If it is slipped or broken, tighten that one or those with another wire in such a way during all times.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	This is the form of teeth and the figure of the correction of two healthy teeth and two broken ones, so tied:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	When one tooth or two return to their places in their locations, and they are healed thus with a string tied, and it remains like this.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And do not know but skilled and wise artisans.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	Some broken ones are suitable for the cause of the bones of a cow, and it is made like a tooth, and it is stopped in that place where the tooth fails, and it is tightened thus with what has been said, and remain in that way for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter LIV.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	Of the grinding of the tooth which is seen in the tongue and prevents speaking.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament which leaves the tongue some times or is natural to the person who doesn't speak, or it happens by accident because of a disease that has already been established.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation for him is that he opens the mouth of the patient, and the tongue is raised, and you cut off that nervous ligament according to its thickness so that the tongue does not get caught in its knot.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	If in that is some hardness or stiffness, and water stands because of the consolidation of the disease, then you grind it once and cut it off according to its thickness so that the knot is cut and the ligament is dissolved.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And remember not to cause a split in the skin of the flesh, and cut here the bone's bone and take off the blood flow with water.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	And then rinse the trace of the incision with clean water or salt water or fresh water; and then leave the tongue alone for a while so that it does not get consolidated again; and this is the treatment which leaves the tongue alone after rinsing it, so it heals quickly.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	If a flush of blood occurs, apply a poultice to the affected area; if the blood flows, then cauterize that place with an antiserum that is applied in water.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And this part is healed with other treatments until it is cured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter LXV.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	Of the extraction of the ranula without touching the tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Some women have happened to leave the tongue apophthegmatic like a small nameless prevent the tongue from its natural operation, and very strong is it glorified in that place which it fills.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the operation on it is that you open the mouth of the patient before the sun and see the apophthegm.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you turn it black or dark in color, but hard, on which the patient does not have a sense, then do not touch that one because it is hard.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it is inclined to whiteness, in which there is moisture, then you put honey on it and cut that one with a fine scalpel, and cut all of it; and if blood comes out at the time of your operation, then you pause and wash it thoroughly, for it is bitter, before you cut off the blood.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then return to your work as soon as you have finished it completely without leaving anything behind, and wash it with vinegar and salt; and cure that one with the other treatment with water until it is cured.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter .xxvi.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	Of extraction of the apophthegm from two ears and that which is not in the jaw, and of the other apophthegms.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When it comes out in the jaw, so are glands that are gathered together glandular mass, which happen sometimes at first and are called two ears, which when you treat them with water that I have mentioned above in the division, and if they are not cured, then consider whether the apophthegm is hard, of black color, of little feeling, do not touch that one because it is hard.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is of red color and the root is thick, then do not touch that one because of the blood flow; let it mature on its own, and then you tear it off or cut it off yourself.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is of whiteness color, soft, and the root is fine, then that one needs to be cut with a scalpel.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the operation on it is that you consider, in front of your operation, if the apophthegm has rested completely or has decreased at all; and then the patient lies before the sun, his head turned to one side, and the mouth is opened, and the servants hold their hands.
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	It should be made of silver or of brass, and it should be fine with a knife.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	Then when you press it with your hand and show the apophthegm to you, and place honey on it, and cut that one at both ends as much as you can.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And another water that does not cause the tunics to come off, and then cut that one with the instrument of which this is the form:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	It is assembled with forceps, however, the ends of it are sharp, so that the orifice of each one is on the edge of the other, very sharp, which should be made of iron sharpened on both sides.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	If this instrument is not with you, then cut it with a scalpel of which this is the form: It should be sharp on one side and dull on the other.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And then after cutting one of them, cut the other according to this method of cutting, and then cut the mouth of the patient with a clean scalpel, and wash it thoroughly with water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If there is a flow of blood from the patient, wash it with a decoction of oak galls or with leaves of mulberry and similar things up to that point where the blood flow is stopped, and then cure that one until it is cured.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And in some cases there are more apophthegms in the jaw than those two ears, and you cut them according to what I have said above in the cutting of two wounds in the head.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And I have already treated a woman with an apophthegm which was born in her jaw, the apophthegm which tended to black color, of little feeling, and which had closed her jaw, and the woman breathed without difficulty, and she had forbidden her from eating or drinking water, and she was about to die if it were not stopped soon.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	The apophthegm had come so far that there were two gaps in it, which opened and closed twice.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	Then I held firm with one of my hands and cut it with the other, and threw it away far from me, and then I looked at the gap in the other hand, and then I pressed the mouth of the patient and closed the tongue, and then I put the instrument into the apophthegm.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	Then I cut off a large part of it, and it did not flow with blood except for a little bit.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Then completely I closed the jaw of that woman, and she began to drink water immediately, and then I did not continue cutting that apophthegm after a long time, and it was replaced by another apophthegm which opened in place of it.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Then I went around and cauterized the jaw of the patient, in addition to that; then I continued to walk and did not know what to do with myself.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter.xxxvii.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	Of cutting a wound when it is apophthegmatic.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When it comes out in the mouth, and it is apophthegmatic and long, then it is called a bubo; and if it comes out at the root, which is thick and round, it is called a lump.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	But when it is cured with the water that I have mentioned above in the division, and if your treatment does not help it, and it still has apophthegm; and if it is long, and it bleeds, of black color or of red, and it hurts a little bit, then you consider whether you should cut it off completely, because there is fear about the patient.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you see that one according to the way I have said above about its whiteness and length, then you should cut it off completely and press the tongue of the patient with your hand on the instrument which I have mentioned, and then put the instrument into the new one, and cut that one down below, and cut it with one of two instruments which are mentioned in the cutting of two wounds.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And you should not cut that one except with water which comes out naturally by itself, because if you cut it further, it will hurt the patient.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	Then cut it, using water which I have mentioned above in the cutting of two wounds, and cure that one until it is cured.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the patient is frightened by cutting it, consider using water in cauterizing it; and the way of cauterizing it is that you fill the concave part of the instrument with sharp water, and then cut it.
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	It should be filled in the concave part of it with medicine as much as the hollow of a spoon, and you place that one on the uvula, and then the patient moves his tongue back and forth because of the medicine inside it, so that it does not go out by chance from the mouth by way of the medicine which is inside.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	Then take your hand away from the medicine and press it onto the uvula for a long time until the patient's breath is stopped because of the medicine which has been forced out by the uvula.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you wish, take a grip and wrap the thread around the extreme end of the ray, and immerse the grip in the medicine, and push the ray with the grip into a tube of about half an inch, so that the grip sticks to that tube, and make it go as often as you like into the cauterization of the grape, and let that stay there so that it dries up and falls off after three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you want to repeat the medicine, repeat that one, and let the cauterization be washed in the circuit of the grape with the grip embedded at the border, and rub it with water, and cure it well outside with ointment, and wash it again with soap that is cured.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this type of treatment is safer than surgery and less feared.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Some are cured with a water that is more subtle than cauterization and incision, because it is cured with sub-fumigation in this way: Take garlic, hyssop, chamomile, marjoram, and other similar herbs, and put them all together in a cup, and immerse them in vinegar, and boil them; and the liquid be well drained, and placed in its place on the instrument of iron according to this method; it should be made of silver or iron.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And the end be inserted into the mouth of the patient in such a way that the vapour reaches the vocal cords over the bridge, so that the vocal cords are much darkened.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And repeat over those spots that are dry, and take care not to perform this treatment at the beginning of the appearance of abscesses, because it would be too sharp on the abscess, and do not make water go in, but rather leave a declaration of the abscess from him caut.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	But if you don't have this instrument with you, take a cane and compose at the end of it a tube of leather, so that the mouth of the patient is covered, because the tube of the skin prevents the vapour from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this treatment is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter LXVIII.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	Of the extraction of thorns and of water that adheres to the groin and of other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Thorns that adhere to the groin or a thorn of pay or any other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Then take out water that is apparent from it, and let the sight fall on it, because you press your tongue against the instrument in front of the sun, so that you can see the water that is in the groin.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And water that does not appear to you in the groin, take care not to make the patient vomit before the food is digested in his stomach, because it greatly delays the attached cause of the groin by vomiting; or let him drink a stone of naphtha or of radish or a piece of dry bread; or take a sponge of sea-grass that is dry and wet it with wine, and put it on firmly over the patient's mouth, and push it under his tongue, because when it reaches the place in which thorns are attached and are to be extracted, then push them under.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	Then take a snake and hold it in your hand, and if the patient' breathes, extract it; or take a weasel and hold it under the patient' nose, and if he breathes, extract it; or take a mouse and hold it under the patient' nose, and if he breathes, extract it.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	But if you are not able to make them come out by those causes that we have mentioned, then take an iron instrument according to this form:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And it should be bigger than a needle, and in the end of it there should be a cavity that you can put into the patient' groin with ease.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And raise his head high up, and take care not to touch the side of the jaw with your hand, so that the patient' breath reaches his mouth, and if it is a tooth or a thorn that hurts him, or if he feels pain in his jaw, then make the treatment.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	But the patient should go into it, and he should feel better because his sense of taste is not affected by the treatment; but take care that the cause of pain does not move to another part of the body, and that the patient' mouth or tongue do not come in contact with the instrument.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter LIX.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	Of the extraction of a bleeding sore attached to the groin.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When blood is treated with water that we have mentioned in the division of the treatment with medicines and do not taste it, consider first in the groin of the patient to the sun, because you have moved your tongue on the instrument that we have described.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Then if you find the bleeding sore, extract it with a small blade or with gentle touches.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if you don't find it possible to extract it in this way, take a tube that is concave and insert it into the groin of the patient, and put an iron ring on the end of the tube, and make as many punctures as the bleeding sore has stopped and kept the patient from drinking water all day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	And then take a vessel full of soap water, and work the mouth of the patient in it, and wash the mouth with it; and don't drink any food or drink water for an hour after that, because the bleeding sore will soon stop when it feels the water.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	But if it does not come out with water that we have mentioned, then sub-fumigate the patient with cumin or asafoetida using the instrument that we have described in the sub-fumigation of the vocal cords.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Make water, and do it quickly.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And it is another way of operating in sub-fumigation of the vocal cords, that you take a cup in which are ignited carbons and cover the cup with a blanket, so that there is a hole in it through which you can fit the end of the instrument; then make the sub-fumigation; and place the patient' mouth on the end of the tube, and close his mouth so that the sub-fumigation does not come out until you know that the sub-fumigation has reached the bleeding sore, because the bleeding sore will soon stop.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if it does not come out, then repeat the sub-fumigation several times, and keep the patient from drinking, and eat salty foods and drinks, and don' t drink water, and then it will be necessary that in this treatment he does not come out.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the form of the instrument that is used to extract a bleeding sore from the groin when it is seen; and it is like pliers as often as possible, but because it is in its curvature:
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	which is placed on the groin, and its end is similar to an owl's beak, which is sharp, because when it touches any cause, it does not let go.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter X.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which is the sum of the speech in the appearance of abscesses and in section.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	The abscesses are specific spots, and they appear in different ways, as you will remember from these words, from each one of them in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they vary in piercing and cutting them in two ways, one being the specific nature of the abscesses; and the other by dealing with their moisture.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second way is according to the places where they occur, because the accident of the abscess in the head is another one from the accident of the abscess in the neck; and the accident of the abscess in the flesh is another from the accident of the abscess in a joint; and each of them is subject to treatment.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And more of these are some that cover, so they should not be pierced but rather the growth of pus in them or their completion.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	And more of these are some that cover and should not be pierced but rather the growth of pus in them or their completion. However, some blisters that are near joints, since the blister when it is next to a joint, its content extends into that joint and strongly corrupts the ligaments or nerves of that joint, so causing a spasm of that limb; or is a blister next to a main limb, and if you delay its piercing then it becomes inflamed towards the main limb; or is one near the anus, for this cannot reach the inner part of the anus, or does not cover well because it is next to the anus, so that it does not burst and is elongated towards the anus openings, and a fistula forms, or that it forms in the term of the blister that does not heal.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	May also cover that you know the time to pierce the blister, and then it is when it has become mature.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And know that it has become mature when there is a decrease in pain and fever, and a decrease in redness and swelling, and the tip of the blister becomes sharp, and other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And since you know that piercing should be done in a place away from the blister's pus and pus coming from the cure of the eminence.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And pierce always at the length of the flesh or the body, if the blisters are in the parts of the limbs or feet, and in places of the intestines, nerves, arrases; and finally, in any place that is not reflected; because in those that are reflected, use piercing according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	May also when the blister is in a fleshy place, then pierce it within that its contents are completely digested according to their nature, as we have said; because if you pierce it before its contents are completely digested, the content will be prolonged inside, and it will cause much pain and swelling, and harden the lips and depth of the blister.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	May also pierce some blisters according to the thickness of the flesh or body out of necessity, or according to its contents and the member that digests it.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And when you make a small hole, and in large blisters make a large hole and wide or many cuts according to the variety of the size of the blisters.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And some of the blisters that cover and should be pierced when they are already hardened, as we have said; because if you do it in a place where there is a lot of fluid, it will burst, and those who happen in two different places or in several parts, will cause great pain.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And of those that are not cut into three angles; and of those that are cut into the figure of an oak leaf, and of the blisters of the arms.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And of those that are cut roundly and moon-like, and similar to them.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	May also to those whose blisters are superficial like lions, that you do not pierce them except with a small hole, or flat one only.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And when the blister is thick and has already collected some pus, then pierce it and do not cauterize it that all the pus comes out in that moment; take some out, and on another day take out a larger amount, and make holes according to its size so that it comes out little by little.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	And most importantly if the patient is a man of courage, or a woman, or a small child, or an old person in declining health; because the animal spirit has much force to move out the pus, and greatly weakens the patient, and you should close them up.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Take care of this chapter with great caution, and consider that if the plague of the blister is small, or a flat cut, then administer the poultices of ash or cotton; and if the blister is large, and the cuts are wide, then know that you should pause a moment before going into any wound.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if in the blister there is a part of the cord cut away or concaved within the circuit, then know that you should compress it with old cloth or a thread of linen, and when you have gone over it with pans or razors, moisten it; and strengthen it after three days; and proceed to treat the contents as described above, and cure what is in it, which comes out from within.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	May also if it happens that there is a flow of blood at the time of your operation, then administer warm water and vinegar to the wound, wrap a cloth in it, and pause it over the place where the blood flows.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	May also if the blood flow persists, then administer the medicines and powders that I have recommended in several places of this book and division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	May also if it is in wintertime, and the place of the blister is a place of cold nerves, then know that you should put powder made from wine or oil into the wound, and pause it over those places.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is in summer, and the places are fleshy, then know that you should pause powder made from wine or oil, and all of this be applied within three days, as we have said; and when you cut away the blister, then administer to it what is recommended for its cure, which comes out from within.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And so is the water that is necessary for the knowledge of the cure of blisters in general; but, according to the distinction already made, each blister has its own way of being cured, which will be explained in another chapter.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter .xli.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	Of the cutting of blisters that come out at the top of the arm.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the upper part of the arm small blisters, and from them come little nodules that contain skin that is soft; and from these little blisters there are little drops.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And their pus comes out like blood, and from those that contain water similar to lemon juice.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And from those that contain water similar to blood, and like it; and from those that are dry, hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the cutting of all of them, and in the extraction of those that do not cause pain, you should not pierce them except with a small hole, or flat one only.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation in cutting is that you apply them with the instrument that is called an entremes, within which you should know that it contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	Because if the water contained is little, then cut it with a small cut according to this shape:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And start in the cutting of the line from B to G; then, when the water is evacuated, then scrape that skin for what it contains, and do not leave any trace of it, because four drops return if left on their own.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And dip it in Egyptian ointment if there is any, or in water and salt; and fill the blister with poultice, and leave it for another day, because with water it corrodies all that is underneath that film.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And dip it again in Egyptian ointment twice if it needs it, and leave it for another day, because you should know that there is no trace of the film left; then cure the plague with the ointment within, which will be healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if the blister contains a lot of fat, then pierce it according to this shape:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	am seccio have a form of crotch, and geta oncis between two lips of the section and drag that of all start, and exert your virtue in extraction of the tunic which counts that.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	Or if your surgery is causing you pain, then first let me tell you.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And seemingly cut the lymph node of the section and cure according to what you have said; and cut over lymph node is lighter, because it is little blood and little moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And some times so cold of these lymph nodes which are in the head in some men who have entirely no moisture; and this is because you cut with a knife on a lymph node in the head of an old woman and turn back the lymph node thus with a sharp pain, dull, white, which cannot be cut, and if at anyone it was struck, it would plague him.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	But in the other lymph nodes in the head this is not this chapter, so as the lymph nodes that come to the heads of children and their roots of ears, but the section of these all is superficial.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And pause the hole of those of all start lower than their for so that it is relieved the body of the disease to the starts lower.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	Then approach cure those with water which are good to that of cure.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	On section of the scrofulas which happen in the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	Spots seen may be these lymph nodes in the neck and in the shoulders and in the arms; and some spots happen to other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that happen in the neck, and such spots are born among them, and all scrofula of these is distinct from its own tunic, and so when in the nodes and lymph nodes of the head, have told.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	The spices of these scrofulas are spots, because from these some lymph nodes, and those that contain moisture, and those that are malignant which do not obey to cure.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Therefore in that which you have good disposition in the Treatment, of which the color of water is manifest to the color of the wine, and it is nice to all start, and it is not attached to the nerves of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the surgery, and it is not thick, cover that you cut with a knife on a start from its surface to the start of the body of the line of .B., and score that of all start, and extend two or three oncis on the lips of the codena if there is need of these, so as we have said in the lymph nodes of the head, and extract that little by little.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is more careful that is not cut with a knife the vein or nerves.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And it is more careful that you do not cut with a knife the vein or nerves; because if you cut the vein or surgery and stop you from your operation, then pause in the plague of the threefold and other powders which remain fluxes of blood, and start the plague, and leave that within so that the acuteness of the lymph node is relieved and the plague is softened and begins to rot.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the blood is cut off.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Therefore returns to your operation within which you had made it complete.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	Then ask the good doctor if there is any cause of these other small scrofula; then cut those and clean those.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it is in the root of the scrofula a great vein, cover that you do not cut that scrofula from its root.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Ahead that you lie that with faithful double strong and that you leave that within so that it falls by itself if it does not harm.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	Then fill the plague with old wine which you have already submired in Egyptian ointment, and then cure that.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you cut that scrofula all, then cover that you adjust the two lips of the plague and clean it little by little so that there is no waste of blood.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	But if you think that there is waste of blood by the size of the scrofula, cover that you understand to cut the root of that, and remove it and administer sewing and water which is said.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And those scrofula which contain moisture, pierce that with the superficial hole here where appears to you the place of maturation of its body, and pause the hole of that water which is not the lower start of the body, as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	Then administer the hole, like water and similar to those, so that it corrode that which is not of corrosion.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	Then when you see the plague already be cleaned, then you cure that with Egyptian ointment within so that it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	On section of the lymph nodes which are in the head.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	They said that this section is made in the epileptics, and I did not see any man in our land who had done that.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of the sermon of those.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	But in the men they have a tendency to be evasive the extraction of the epileptics, as well as with water is not done well by all because all veins and major arteries are here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	But in those who have lymph nodes in the mouth or in the ears or two, when the malaria is not in the cane, cover that one escapes the section of epileptics to avoid the loss which is made by perforation.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore when we want water, let us cut the epileptics from three circles of the circles of epileptics or four to a small section for the width in that which is between two circles by quantity, so that the section is in cyphac, not in the cartilage, and this place is convenient for section, because it lacks of meat and the vessels of blood are easily.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the medicine is little, cover that you extend the codena of the head from onci, and then cut the codena within so that it comes to the canal, and avoid the vessels of blood if there is no cause of these.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	Then approach cut it according to what we have told; and is signified over the section of the channel by the light which is from that water which is of his disrupt and by the abscission of the voice.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And leave the plague open for a while.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Then when the hour is renewed in which the hole is made, add two lips of the codena of the plague, and cut that alone for the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	Then administer medicines which make the meat be healed within so that it is healed.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And Albucasis said that the summary of the sermon which we have told, exposition is not but that you see that some of these lymph nodes have already come out to the head of the patient, and the patient has come within death, and its air is cut off, and some go to cut the epiglottis so that it breathes the patient through the place of the plague for a breath, and be saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And by water I will leave the plague open within so that the evil of the malaria is consumed; and this is the evil of it for three days; and then the doctor will order thus the plague, and cure that within so that it is healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And water which I have seen for my metys, is that a servant holds a knife and cuts it in the head of his patient and cuts one start from the cane of the chest, and I was called to the cure of it, and turned back the blood when it was spitting of the patient, and discovered the plague and turned back the blood which was spitting of the plague little.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Therefore I confessed to him that he had not made any incision or scar on it, and yet the wound was healing and was completely cured.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And it did not happen to the servant until he was infected with the plague, and after about five days he returned to his normal condition.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	Now I will tell you that in the section of the epileptic there is no danger.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter .XLI.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	Of section about an apoplexy that happens in the gut before, and is called a hernia from the gut.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This apoplexy, named a hernia from the gut, is great according to the color of the body, and occurs mainly in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	It occurs in two ways, either it is natural or it is accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural one does not cure.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental one is according to two ways, the one resembles fat nodules, and the other resembles an apoplexy that is made by a knot in an artery, and in that there is danger.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And do not say that one should make a supposition about him with iron except in the small ones.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you should examine that one and investigate that one with care, and if it seems to you like a fat nodule and is not suspended on any of the veins, then cut that one open with scissors and extract what is inside, which will be blood; and if not, then examine all his body carefully, and treat the place where the disease occurs with a remedy that cures within that place.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter .XLV.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	Of section about species of nodules.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	The nodules have different kinds, and I have already told you all their kinds in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And that I should tell you the difference between a nodule and an excision with doubt.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Therefore I say that an excision has a hot feeling and fever and intense pains within which are relieved by the heat of the liquid; and it is completed by putrefaction when the fever, pain, and heat cease.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	But in a nodule there is no heat or fever or pain, and it does not hurt when pressed; and if it does not feel like leather nor does it feel soft.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And it is according to the color of the body, and its beginning is with a knot, and it is made like this with air; and it has different kinds, for some are fatty and contain moisture, and the colors of the moisture are various, as I have already told you in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Therefore, when you reach the cure of a nodule, examine that one and investigate that one at the beginning with an instrument called an introducer, according to which its shape will be found in the chapter that follows this one.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	This is the way to investigate apoplexes and all nodules; it is because you take this instrument and introduce it into the place that seems most humid in the apoplexy, and turn the threads little by little until you know that the instrument has already penetrated the knot.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And then finish your examination according to the measure of the size of the apoplexy, and then remove the introducer and examine what remains; and if it is found that it has been in the place of another one, consider what remains.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the moisture has run away, of whatever color it is, then examine that one superficially according to what I have said about apoplexes.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if there is no moisture in the trace of the introducer, then you know that it is fat.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	Dry on top of it at section without having a shape like this:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	as I have taught you, and suspend that one on nails, and cut the knot from all parts with ease, and keep the skin or sack, if you can, onto that one, and extract the matter to the nodule.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	But if it is broken during the operation, it is not possible to extract that matter, and there are various kinds of blood in it, and you should extract them to pieces within which do not break anything for any reason.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	For if it is broken by any means, little or much, the nodule returns according to the kind of matter.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you think that some part of it has broken off, then completely cure some corrosive and acute powder on it, and press it onto the apoplexy with a pointed instrument, and treat that one with another cure within which is cured.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if the nodule is large, then you should cut it in two and treat that one with a remedy that cures within that one.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	But if the pulse of the nodule is pulsating, opposite to that of the other one, then you should cut it and cover the place where it was cut with vinegar and leave that one in peace for three days within which it will cure and relieve the heat of the poison; and then return to cutting that one which is broken off from the nodule.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter .XLVI.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	Of the shapes of necessary instruments in section and puncture.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	The shapes of introducers are three kinds, one large, another medium, and the third small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The shape of the large introducer is like this:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The shape of the medium introducer is like this:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The shape of the small introducer is like this:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	If the instrument with which you work is of iron, and if it has rounded edges, and is pointed in a pleasant way, then introduce the introducer into the apoplexes.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	These are called only three kinds of instruments, and one of them is called "a bird".
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	The three kinds are called, one large, another medium, and the third small.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The shape of a large experiment is like this:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The shape of a medium experiment is like this:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The shape of a small experiment is like this:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	It should be known that the above shapes are suitable for apoplexes, excisions, fistulas, and abscesses to the extent that they apply to bones and other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And the shapes should be round, large, and sharp, with large needles sewed on it, and they are made of lemon-colored thread, or iron thread, or silver thread; and the best to use is lemon-colored thread.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And the experiments of black plums are suitable for opening fistulas in the concavity of which they appear to be reflected, and for reflecting them onto their own surface.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	The three kinds are called, some of them long, and others medium, and the third small, according to the measure of the width of the fistula and the strictness of it.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	The shape of a large experiment made of lead is like this:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	The shape of a medium experiment made of lead is like this:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	The shape of a small experiment made of lead is like this:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The shapes of the nails are of different kinds, some of them simple, having only one curve, and there are three species: large, small, and medium.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And they are called nails or hooks, and there are three kinds.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	The shapes of the nails with two curves are called, and there are three species.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	The shapes of the nails with three curves are called, and they come in three species.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	All of them are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	The shape of a large simple nail is like this:
Forma de unci simple migier:	The shape of a medium simple nail is like this:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	The shape of a small simple nail is like this:
Forma de unci orp gran:	The shape of a large hook nail is like this:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	The shape of a medium hook nail is like this:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	The shape of a small hook nail is like this:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Form of a large hole has two curves:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	Form of a small hole has two curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	Form of a small hole has two curves:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a large hole has three curves:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a small hole has three curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a small hole has three curves:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the forms of the scalpels that I cut and scrape knots and pustules with them, and they are of three kinds, some large, some medium, and some small.
Forma de scapel gran:	Form of a large scalpel:
Forma del scapel migier:	Form of a medium scalpel:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Form of a small scalpel:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The ends of those are sharp and the other ends are dull, and they are not placed in such a way, but rather so that it is cut smoothly in the excision of the knots with the fear of cutting a vein or a nerve, and by which it is healed the patient and also has some relief through the drying up of the pustule.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the forms of poultices, and they are of three kinds: large, medium and small, as you see them.
La forma de magda gran:	Form of a large poultice:
Forma de magda migier:	Form of a medium poultice:
Forma de magda pauc:	Form of a small poultice:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	When it is done with the erasion and seems like water with alcohol added to it.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And it is in the outer end punctured with hidden spice and in those splints that run inside and outside, as you wish, thus sprinkled.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	Forms of splints, which are wrapped between the legs so as to pierce the pustules and do not feel the pain, and they are of three kinds: large, medium and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the forms of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	Forms of leeches, with which is cut off the flow of blood, and they are of three kinds: large, medium and small; forms of the foot:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	When it is done with the erasion and seems like a drop of blood, round in shape and some distance from the tip, and they are subtle.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And these are the kinds of leeches that should be large, medium and small, so that by cutting off the flow of blood quickly, as needed, and when it is first used, it is not medicine.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, you do not use them to cut off blood from all over the body, and you only use them in carnous places, such as in the leg splints and in the knee joints, and in the arm splints, and in the breasts and belly and thighs, and resembling their carnous parts with humors.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And some of these instruments are made in the form of small scissors and cut according to this shape; by which the blood is cut when performed with phlebotomy or cutting a vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And some of these instruments are made round according to this shape:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter .xliii.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	Of the treatment of male breasts, which are assembled from female breasts.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some of these instruments are inflated the breasts of old men when they begin to lose hair on their heads, and then are deflated the breasts, and are assembled the breasts of women, and Roman poultices, large.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And whoever wishes this, consider cutting those with a lunar section according to this form, from the line B within the line G, and then cut off all the grossness, and then fill in the plague of incurable medicine, and then join together the two lips of the plague with stitchwork, and heal that which is within.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	If the breast declines to the half-way mark and is softened by its magnitude when it comes to women, then cut it into two halves upside down, in the shape of a lunar figure, each half being contained within the other from within, until such time as the major line contains the minor according to this form of the line from B and the line from G. And then cut off the codena which is between the two lips of the plague, thus preventing the gurgling, and administer what is necessary to the cure within that it be healed.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not please the cutting of what it is covered in the inquietude of the plague, and by the flow of blood, then consider that you fill up the plague of incurable medicine by immersing it in corrosive water and let it rest within that which it corrodes, and then heal that which is within.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter.xliv.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	Of the perforation of pustules that come from below the teeth.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	Those pustules that come from below the teeth are of the kinds of scrofulas and sores, which contain a pus.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And those which contain moisture are of some little kind; and those that contain moisture, cut according to this figure from a lunar section: from the line G to the line B. And when all is evacuated, what remains in the pustule is cured by the cure of the cough, and it is left for another day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And then let the cough be left alone and be healed with a suitable enema, within that it be healed.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the pustule of the knots is, and of the scrofulas, then you cut them over there as we have said in the section about scrofulas as regards the cutting.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	If the plague is spread out in such a way that it has a tendency to putrefy, then administer the cauterization according to what we have said before.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter.xlix.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	Of the perforation of pustules which happens through a vein or an artery.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an artery is broken and the codena is consolidated which is over that, then motas appear of pustules: those being the signs by which it is recognized that inflammation and pustule are caused by an artery or a vein; for when a pustule is caused by an artery, it is long and aggregated in the artery's lumen; and that, when you feel the sound of the pustule with the teeth, you hear a hissing.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And that which is through a vein is round in appearance on the surface of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And the section over this pustule is an error, and mostly in those that are on the left sides of the body, and in the thighs, and in the neck, and in many places of the body; and it is a large one, so that its treatment with iron should be avoided, and that which is in the ends, or at the top, should be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	However, over that which is caused by inflammation of the artery' s orifice, cut into the codena in the long section; and then open the section up to a hook, and release the arteries from within.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And then measure over that needle and let it penetrate into the other one, and join together the artery with a double knot in two places, — which causes you to feel the pulse in the extraction of two arteries which are on the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And then puncture the place which is between two threads within that it cause all the blood to be gone, and let the pustule dissolve.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then administer the cure by which is generated the pus, and let the threads fall within that they be cured; and heal that with a suitable enema, within that it be healed.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if it is a pustule caused by a vein section, then consider that you have the hand near the pustule with your own hand, so that it is possible to make the needle pass through the place where you held it; and let it penetrate through the double knot, within that you extract the one from the other thread, and bind up the pustule with two threads according to what I have said before regarding the knot of the two parts.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	If you fear that the thread will break, insert the needle first and then remove all the plasma, making a small incision with the needle first, and tighten the threads in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Then dry the wound in its place within until it is completely healed, then cut off the excess of the thread, and leave what remains of it hanging.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then place over it the palm that you have dipped in oil and ointment and apply the cure that is done with water and vinegar inside until it is healed.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Take away the wound that occurs because of twisting of nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	So that it happens in the artery and in the vein, and also it sometimes happens in nerves when they are struck or because of excessive work, and also for the following reasons:
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And that it is placed in its place by the helpers or by the heel, or in any other place where the joints are irritated.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And it is a painful swelling that resembles the color of the other parts of the body, and it is in the largest ones of them that they are stiff because of the violence, and you feel a kind of stupor in them when you touch them.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And it is not a swelling that grows on the front of the body, and for this reason the thread remains, and it irrite all at once and does not grow in front or behind.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore those who are irritated in the joints should not be treated with iron because it would strengthen the opposite part.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	But those who are on the head or forehead, treat them with a sharp knife.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	If it is a small swelling, then treat it with a poultice and cut off the root of the swelling.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is large, then treat it with ointment and cut off the root of it, and then stop up that part; and adjust the wound with stitches, and apply the cure inside until it is healed.
Capitol .li.	Here we continue.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	Of section of a swelling that occurs on the lips or in the abdomen.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	Then treat those men who have red spots in the belly and other parts of the body, with a similar treatment to that used for mushrooms, because their roots are fine and the head is thick; and also for those whose lips are swollen, and those who are small and fat.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	You have already seen one, and in the belly there were two things that looked like mushrooms, and there was no difference between those white ones, with small roots.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And their lips were swollen and open, and moisture ran from them all the time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Then you cut off those and sewed up the other in eighteen places. and the other had five inches.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And the operation of their incision is that you consider whether the patient's skin is moist, and the color of his flesh is white, moist, with small roots; then you cut them with a sharp knife, and if you feel any pain during the cutting, stop up that part with a poultice, and apply fire to it, because what is felt during the incision should be expelled without any problem; and if you notice any pain after applying heat, cauterize that area.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if the patient is a little bit frightened and anxious, do not apply iron to cut them; but rather take fresh lead, and tighten the skin in the same way as it has been described, and leave it for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	Then tighten the lead thread; do not cut it, and let it remain in place until it is cured by itself because that work will be enough.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	If the flesh is of thick roots, then there is no need to fear or worry during their incision, and more so in that part which is in the belly.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	It might be possible for you to cut off most of it, and then stop up that part so that it does not grow back.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	Then heal that wound so that the wound heals quickly.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And be careful not to cut off flesh that has a dark color, is of little feeling, and does not look healthy because it might be cancer.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	I then remembered your words about the skull.
Capitol .lii.	Here we continue.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	Of treatment for umbilical hernia.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	An umbilical hernia occurs for several reasons: either because of fissures in the navel that project outward, and from which the skin or membrane comes loose; or because of an excess of serous fluid that flows from a vein or artery depending on whether it is located in front or behind; or because air passes through a constricted vessel.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	If it is due to fissures in the navel and to the protruding of the skin or membrane, then the color of the swelling resembles that of the body, and there is sharp pain and different sensations.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	If it is due to an overflow of fluid that flows from a vein or artery, then the part affected by this discharge should be observed, and it should not be hidden with cloth; and it should return when necessary, and there is great pain in its absence, and a strong desire arises as if to drink water, and violent work takes place.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	If it is due to moisture, then it should not be hidden when you touch it with your hand, and it should not be constricted or crammed; and it should return when necessary.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	If it is due to wind, then these signs appear: the swelling becomes darker and declines towards the left side.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	If it is due to hunger, then the swelling is heavy, thick, and hard; and it increases according to a certain quantity.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	If it is due to air passing through a constricted vessel, then touch should be avoided.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation on it is that you consider whether the umbilical hernia is due to an artery or vein, or because of air passing through a constricted vessel; then you should refrain from treating it because in that part there is fear and anxiety as I have taught you in the chapter where I talked about swellings caused by arteries and veins.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	If the umbilical hernia is due to an excess of fluid or skin, then you should order your servant to hold the patient upright, and remain standing; and then stop up that part with a sharp knife in the same way as it has been described, and extend the swelling in the same direction as the navel on top of the hip bone, and apply the knife edge around the navel in the same way as you have taught yourself; and then extend the swelling around the navel in the opposite direction on the back of the hip bone, and apply a sharp blade around it.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	Then cut off the middle of the swelling that is extended on top of the navel and insert your hand inside; and if you notice any pain in the skin, then stop up that part with a sharp knife; and if you do not feel any pain, then extend the skin towards the navel with your hand, and bring the excess of fluid towards the back of the hip bone.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	If the skin is broken because of fissures in the navel, then cut off a piece of it and insert your finger into that part; and if you notice a light glow in that place, do not tighten the skin or apply pressure to blood vessels; but rather apply a poultice.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	If this is against your arceria or vein, then circle around that point and return to your operation; and take two needles and put them in those two wires strongly and insert two needles into the circuit you have made around the swelling in a way like a ring, which should penetrate through; and then tighten the swelling in four parts on the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you want, remove the needles and let the swelling remain inside that it can stretch the meat and fall by itself; or cut it when it becomes thin and then heal what is covered with water inside that it should be healed.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the prominence of the navel is not of meat but of moisture, then cover what you have opened with a bandage so that it dries up and destroys the water, which it will suck up, and then heal what is covered by water and that consolidates the area.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 34.
De curacio de cranc.	Of the Treatment of Craniitis.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have said, in the division, of the kinds of craniitis and in what way the treatment of it is with medicine, and that it is difficult for the treatment to succeed without causing ulcers; and we have said that craniitis is born in the most important and careful way for the cure of it.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And they said that some craniitis are in areas where the eradication of it is possible, namely when it is on the nipples or in the groin and similar to the limbs attached to remove all of it, especially when it is starting small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	But when it is old and large, do not cover it, because I cannot heal that wound nor have I ever seen it healed, nor has it come to water.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation in it is when it is placed as we have said, that you go first and leave the patient and purge some of black cholera, and then heal what has been infected, if it is evident reflux.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And then prepare the patient for the operation, in which place is located for the operation, and then draw with a pointed awl those that are covered on it; and then cut from all sides with a smooth scythe so that no cause of its wounds remains.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And let the blood flow, and do not wash that wound away, and squeeze the areas, and wipe off the gross blood with your hand or with the instrument you can get to it.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if your hand is opposite to gross blood from a vein or artery, then cauterize that area so that the flow of blood stops, and then heal it with another treatment so that it is healed.
Capitol .liv.	Chapter 35.
De curacio de ydropici.	Of the Treatment of Hydropesis.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already recommended, in the division, of the kinds of hydropesis of water and the signs of each kind, of the treatment of it with medicine.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And that which is cured with iron is not but the kind of αλθίτισης alone, and it does not approach to cure the kind of tympanites nor the kind of hypostasis, because water is deadly.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have already treated this kind of hydropesis tympanites with medicine and do not confer your medicine, then consider, for if the patient has already achieved a victory or is suffering from another type of hydropesis, such as coughing or abdominal pain resembling those, then keep in mind that you do not give it to treat with iron, because there is a danger about it.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	But if you find the patient to be of robust virtue, and there is no other illness in him but hydropesis only, and neither child nor old man, then the way of the operation of it is that you raise the patient between your hands, and the minister presses his abdomen towards the floor, forcing the water out through the opening of the penis, and then take a spittle according to this form:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	it is of two sharp parts long, of the acute end with a spittle; but nevertheless it should be in a short time little by little, so that during the operation you do not enter into the budel, and that all these are done to him.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And then consider if the generation of hydropesis is from one side of the navel, for it is custom to cut off three fingers on each side, in the left part of it on the penis.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	But if the generation of hydropesis is through illness of the genitals, then your section should be on the left side of the navel for three fingers.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the generation of it is through the self-abuse, then your section should be on the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	Do not cover that your section is on the rib on which you want to operate the patient so that the superfluity does not run into that area.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And then pierce with the instrument the whole of it, and then insert into that section, and raise your hand to the spittle between the cup and the syringe, and you squeeze it out; and if the quantity is a little less than a finger's width.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And then pierce the syringe so that it reaches the spittle to the desired location, and it is a place of water.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then squeeze it out and insert an instrument whose form is this one:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	It is like a silver tube subtile; it is made of silver or iron or lead, and which has at the end a small hole, and on the sides three holes: two in a row and one in the other row; and its end should be pointed according to the feather form, as thus:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And in the end of it should be strong, for when the instrument comes into contact with water, then let it pour out half a quantity of water, because if you pour out less than that, fortly hurts the patient by solving his spirit, or something happens to him that is approaching death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	But pour out that second quantity of the virtue of it, and according to what you think about the disposition of the patient's virtue and his goodness.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And then remove the instrument, and keep back the water which causes it because it is kept back by the rib that keeps back the hole that is on the syringe of which you have already been recommended to pierce according to this form.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And then repeat the instrument another day if the patient tolerates water, and pour out a small quantity of water, and keep it for some time on account of fear, and do not make an error so that it does not run with water but only a little bit.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	But if you are afraid of the patient, and let a great quantity of water flow, then heal it in the sand, and bathe it, and wait for a long time; and heal it with desiccating medicines so that it is healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And then cauterize over the stomach, and self-abuse and the flow of water are according to what I have told you that is preceded.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter 50.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	Of the Treatment of Children Who Have Urinary Incontinence.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Some of the children are born from the belly of their mother and the head of their mixture is not pierced (or it is a straight hole or is not in its place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, cover with a piercing so that it is born with a small needle according to this form:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And then pause in the hole a small silver nail and bind it, and do so for three days or four.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when he wants to urinate, he stands up and urinates; and then return him.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you don't hold back the urine that goes over the area, it is possible that the urine that goes there does not go away.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	The one for whom the hole was made should be treated with lead clove, as I said before, for a few days until it is amplified.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	The ones where the hole is not in its place should be treated, for this causes it, because the one who is born with the hole has his penis raised to his navel according to his nature, and so he cannot urinate into the bowels, until he raises the penis to his navel; and this does not happen, because the sperm does not come to the mother according to its right way, and it is a disease that causes pain.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	And the way to perform it on him is that the patient be put on his back, and the head of his penis be taken from his left hand with a strong grip for the extraction, and cut off the head of the penis at the place of the perineum with an awl sharp or with a razor, so that the blood comes out, or you don't remove any part, so that the head of his penis looks like the head of the penis and the hole falls into its place according to what is covered.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And keep in mind that when you operate on the flux of blood, because it may happen to him; and stop him from bleeding, and heal the plague until he is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter LVI.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	Of the white color that occurs in the foreskin of the penis and of corruption, blackness, and adhesions of the foreskin of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	White spots may occur on the penis, and it is an eminence of flesh that is smooth.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And of that one is malignant and the other is not malignant.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	Not malignant, so you suspend with a small ointment and cut off that part until it is all gone; and then put on it, with the help of God, a little Egyptian ointment; and then put on him, heal him with the help of God in the day after tomorrow.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the white color is malignant, of a yellow color, then you should take care that you cut off his penis and remove its head with a razor.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	If the white color is in the foreskin of the penis, and one part of the white color is inside the foreskin and another part is outside, then take care that you do not cut off the foreskin before it is hard; and then treat the outside, because when you treat the outside without treating the inside first, it is not certain that it will not be infected.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And if blackness and corruption occur in the genitals and in the foreskin, then take care to cut off all that has already been blackened and is about to rot or has already rotted; and then line it with a solution of flour from milk of magnesia and of three parts of salt and one part of vinegar.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And then heal him with the other treatment until he is healed.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	If there is blood flow from the penis, then administer lunar cauterization according to this form:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	Because cauterizing rejuvenates two opposite conditions, namely blood flow from the penis and corruption when it is rotten.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the penis is rotten and destroyed completely in the hour, then take care to insert a lead catheter into the meat of the foreskin so that the patient urinates through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adhesion does not occur unless the foreskin is present, and circumcision is not required; and when adhesion occurs due to plague or an abscess) then scrape with a sharp blade until it is dissolved and the head of the penis is completely released.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to scrape carefully, then take care to scrape with a sharp blade at the base of the head of the penis and of the foreskin, and then because the foreskin, when it is fine, is pierced by its subtlety carelessly.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And then separate the foreskin from the head of the penis with a sharp blade, which has already been moistened in water to prevent adhesion.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And then it is healed with vitriol within the day.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter LVII.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	Of the cleaning of children and of the treatment that occurs in those who are circumcised.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution for all kinds of plague: but since it is part of our operation and our will, and since it is particularly suited to children, we must assign this better operation and the lighter treatment to those who are lost and lead them to salvation.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	I therefore say that the young people do not say circumcision for many of their free friends, because they do not use it in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired it by experiment, which causes me to be afraid of most of the craftsmen and barbers who practice circumcision and cleansing with a needle; and they use an awl and cut with a scalpel.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And I have seen all these ways, and I do not find better cleansing with scissors, with an awl that is used in cleansing with a needle, because the rope of the foreskin has two covers, and the thread pulls it up, and it is forced to another cut, and it hurts surely.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And the cleansing that is done by shaving, and which is done with a knife, which is used by barbers, is not secure for the incision of the end of the male member, because it goes deep into the flesh.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	In the operation with a needle, surely you will harm and corrupt your own operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the rope of the child is short by nature, and white spots may occur in such a way that there is no need for cleansing, and I have seen it.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	More of the cleansing that is done with scissors and an awl, the goodness, experiment shows me, because the scissors are a proportional incision, so that the sharpness that comes from it is as such that if you press your hand with a sharp edge, and cut according to a comparison at a time; and then the compression of the rope around the penis completely, with which no mistake is made.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the way of the first operation is that you put the child to lie down if he is a big one, but if he is a small one, that you do not let him stand, and then take off the rope from his penis completely the next day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And then put joy on him in all this way, which is at your possible risk that he receives his intelligence.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And then put him to stand between your two hands firmly prepared, and do not make it stand up; and hide the scissors in your hand or leave the little one, so that the child does not see those or anyone else's instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And then put your hand on the penis of him and blow on the rope, and pull it up until it is completely cut off, and then cleanse him with water; and if any part of the foreskin remains, then cut it off.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And then lay the rope on the double awl, and then fasten with two knots at a time, and then cut the little one first of the two threads, and then bind him firmly with a good knot, and cut between two knots.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then lift the rope gently, and peel off the head of the penis; and then leave the blood to flow a little, because it is better so; and then pour dust on it, and over the dust pour milk of two days old goat's milk, and leave him until the next day; and heal him with the help of God in the day after tomorrow.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The shape of the forceps for the mouth; this is the shape:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	If the extremities are not broken and the others are broken so that there is no space in the claw and the length of the two sharp ends is equal to the length of two knuckles combined.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	The mistake in the operation is that the internal thread completely breaks off; or, if it is only broken in part, you must cut it out.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Then when you have extended your hand to the knuckle in front of the opening of the place and cut it with an equal length;
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it by your thumb, then remove it with a nail and cut it.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	And if three days have passed, and it remains swollen, then remove the cautery with ease and cut off that which is prepared for you; and cut the second one as well.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And keep the tip of the wedge away from him, because it will not be good to him.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And so take care that the blood does not solidify the dust that we have discussed in the treatise on dust.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if the thread is cut off with an excess, and you follow the rule of the second, it will not be felt.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And take care that blood does not enter where we said to heal.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter LVIII.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	On the treatment of urine retained in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by pressure or pain or some congestion, or foul water or polluted food, and similar things to those that we have said regarding the methods of treatment in the division on urinary diseases.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not dissolved, and this retention of it is caused by some pain that has already reached the neck of the bladder, then when the patient lies on his back.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	Then place the feet of the patient on his heels and extend his abdomen by pushing up his legs from beneath his thighs, and squeeze the abdomen as tightly as possible.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Then the neck of the bladder is constricted with a forced expulsion of urine through the rear passage, so that it is emptied completely.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if the urine is not dissolved by water that we have mentioned, the cause being in the patient, then when the instrument is prepared as described above; this is its shape: it should be made of silver and fine lead, with a long tube similar to a palm and half, and at its end a thin tube in the shape of an axe.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the method of inserting the urine through it is that you hold the bag doubled and lie on the outer edge of the loins or hips with good hold; then introduce the ends of the bag into the opening of the tube, and cut them off with the scissors if there is any excess cause of the skin, and then insert it into the tube with some force. And place the bag
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	Then set him down on the bed and wash his bladder and urine with warm water, and apply oil of olive and vinegar.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	Then insert the tube with ease into the opening of the bladder; and double the bag over its edge from behind; then tie off that end tightly; then tie on the other end to the bladder, and do so with care, not severing it until you reach the part that is affected, and no further, unless the patient wants to go there himself.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	Then take off the bag from the hip little by little, because urine makes the loins tight.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Then remove that and treat the urine with the tube; do not let it go until the bladder is empty, and relieve the patient completely.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter LIX.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	On the quality of bladder stones with a clamber and similar instruments that are in agreement regarding water.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When an ulcer or abscess develops in the bladder, or some injury is caused by a sharp object, and you want to distill water and medicine into it, then use the instrument called a clamber; this is its shape:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	It should be closed at one end, but open at the other end.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that there are three openings: two from one part and one from the other; so that when they are all filled together.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	In the beginning it is a closed place, in which water is collected, and according to the quantity that is added to it, an addition is made; until when some cause causes the release of moisture from it, it is released with water, and when it is expelled far away, according to what the clamber has been made for, naphtha is applied in battles at sea.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	Then when you want to introduce moisture into the bladder, place the end of the clamber in the moisture, and throw it into the water that is forced out through the rear opening, because the moisture is thrown into the cavity of the clamber.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	Then place the other end of the clamber in the tube according to what we have said regarding the tube; and then apply the moisture to water, because that moisture passes on to the bladder and is received by the patient.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The shape of the subtle clamber with which the bladder is crystallized, and this is its shape:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	It should be made of silver or lead, the upper end being rounded, resembling a small feather, and the lower end being thin.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	Then place the bladder in motion, and pause the moisture that you want to crystallize in the bladder, and then tie that end tightly with a doubled bag, and heat the moisture over fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	Then insert the other end of the clamber into the bladder.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	Then hold your hand over the bladder with the moisture, and apply pressure on it until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder; then remove the clamber.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	And if you do not have a bladder, then you make a bag of sheep skin and cut it out in a circle; then pierce that completely around; then insert the faithful strongly into those openings, turning them as they are turned; then add the circle to it as it is added to the flesh, until you pause on the water that you want to collect from the moisture, and pour oil and water on it.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	Then you hold that end of the instrument and do as we have said regarding the bladder, and express it until moisture reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Chapter LXI.
De extraccio de peyra.	On the removal of urine.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already discussed in the division the different kinds of urine and the treatment of urine with medicine, and the distinction between urine produced in the lungs and that produced in the bladder, and the signs of each one.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	We have also discussed urine that is produced by the cat's operation with care, and its section.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	Urine produced in the bladder itself is that which is retained in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And these are described in manifest and abbreviated form.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Then I say that urine produced in the bladder is most often found in children; and the signs of it are that the urine passed from the bladder resembles water in its subtlety, and appears in a film; then the patient's belly rubs itself, and there are spots of vision, and it is passed like fire.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And it is a cure for children in the bladder up to twelve years old; and it is difficult treatment in the elderly.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	The younger ones are half-witted because they are between those.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And of that for which the danger is greater and the cure lighter; And if it is little, it is opposite to that.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore, when we come to the cure of that, let us begin at the beginning of that which we are about to describe to you concerning the malady: for it is necessary to remove all the wound from the intestines; because that wound prevents the danger of the disease by means of an investigation.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	Then bring the malady to their feet and place it on the pelvis and massage it with oil so that the disease does not enter into the prostate gland or some other place.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	Then place the knife between your hands, and the servant places his hand on his legs, so that the entire bladder is lowered to where the legs are separated.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	Then take it out and throw it all away.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	Therefore, if you feel the pain in that space, immediately place yourself on your side and massage it with oil.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if the pain does not go away with the oil treatment alone, then when you have untied him completely and oiled him from top to bottom, enter him into his anus.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	Then remove the disease from within that space.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And turn it little by little into the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	Then press upon it with your hand and expel that small amount outside the area where you have cut it open.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And order the minister to press his hand on his bladder; and order another minister, on his right hand, to extend his genitals to the legs, and on his left hand to massage the hernia where the genitals are separated, from the area where you have made the incision.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Then enter a small spike into this invisible place, and this is how it is done.
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	And cut it in half between the anus and the genitals, not in your midsection, as if it were a small amount of disease that might have entered you; and if there is more, do not worry about it, because it will be cut out easily by means of a small incision. And so the incision is made on both sides, leaving some space between the incision and the anus or genitals, so that the disease does not escape through this opening.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And you should know that there is no place for which the incision is difficult because of the disease.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And this liquid is like a lion with a horn; it is round, and its incision is lighter.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	Then if that is the case, cut it out of the opening.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if that is not the way to cut it out, then when you are holding it with your hand or with a strap around your neck, press it strongly on it with a sharp-edged tool; and do not let it escape from your hand. Or enter a sharp instrument into its extreme end.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	Or if you cannot hold it, then make a small hole in it and, if there is any flow of blood, cut off that part with vinegar seasoned with salt.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	Or if the disease is more than two, at the beginning of your speech, press your hand on the opening of the bladder and cut it out; then press a little water towards that place, and if it is very hot, do not worry about it.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if it is very large disease, then ignore that you cut it out with a great incision, for this happens to the malady due to two causes: or because of old age, or because it has come into contact with its continuous urine distilation, since the place is not completely solid.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	Or minister expel it from within that is outside that will be lost; or enter a small portion of it with tweezers into the fracture and remove it in pieces.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Then when you have finished your operation, fill the wound with fresh aloe juice and dragon's blood, and strengthen it.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	Then place a clean cloth over it, oiled with rosewater or oil and water rubbed together, so that the blisters are soft.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	Then return the malady to its neck and do not remove the bandage for three days.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	Then when you have taken off the bandage, dip that place in water and oil, and cure it with a little chamomile and a little diazotic, within which is healing.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	Or if the wound has blisters that are dry, it is like freezing the bladder and its exit is blocked by urine, which causes the bladder to rot and decay; then enter the small amount of disease into the blister, for if it remains there, it will not affect the bladder or its exit.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then wash the wound with rosewater, water and salt, and in opposition to all kinds of diseases, with water that is suitable for washing out the disease within so that it may be cured.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	Then in the hours of all the cure that you have described and placed the medicines which are applied to the area.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the disease is small and is in the middle of the penis, and it is stuck there, and the urine is blocked, then cure that with water which I told you before; because there are twelve places for this disease to appear: first, in the tip of the penis, which can be cured by means of a sharp instrument; second, at the base; third, on either side; fourth, below the testicles; fifth, above the scrotum; sixth, between the testicles and anus; seventh, around the anus; eighth, between the anus and genitals; ninth, in the middle of the testicles; tenth, behind the testicles; eleventh, on either side of the spine; twelfth, in the pubic area. So you should know which of these places is affected by disease; then use this treatment:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	A triangle-shaped point, held, fixed at the tip.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	Then cut it firmly and tie it with a knot behind that area so that it does not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	Then enter the sharp instrument into the penis, piercing easily into that disease.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	Then roll the sharp instrument in your hand over that small disease, and you will pierce it with ease into that disease; and if it is very hot urine, do not worry about it.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	Then place your hand on that portion of the penis which is separated from the anus, for that area is round and it is blocked by urine; and if the disease is cured, it will be cured completely.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	Or if this treatment is not suitable for you because of some cause which prevents that disease, then cut it off from the penis, and another one on the other side.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	Then cut it out of that portion of the penis between two knots.
E aprop extratz aquela.	Then remove it.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	Then take off the bandage and wash the blister with cold water, which will be cured in that wound.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	It is not necessary to tie it tightly from the penis so that it does not return to the bladder, and the other one from above so that, when tied, it does not cause pain; for when the knot is removed from the penis, the hernia returns to its place and hurts that area.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	It is necessary for you to lift the hernia to the legs, or to lower it again, and that area will be cured without any pain; and if the disease returns, it will be cured with water and oil.
Capitol .lxi.	I understand that I have finished reading.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	Of extraction of disease from women's blisters.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Disease in women is rare.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	Or if you have any disease that is mentioned here, then the cure for it is difficult and requires unusual methods.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of them is because the woman is very heavy.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second is that you don't know whether a woman is pregnant or not, as she lies down on the bed when she's pregnant, or among married women.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	And the third is that you don't know whether a woman is knowledgeable about this art, mostly surgery.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth is that the location of the section over the penis in women is far from the location of the penis, so it would be difficult to perform an operation without pain, and in that case fear arises.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	Maybe if necessity forces you to do so, then know that you take a pregnant woman, and rarely is it done.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	Maybe if you are deprived of that, then know that you take a good-looking woman, or a married woman who is well-known in the act of women, or a woman who specializes in this art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Then present that one, and order them to do whatever you send them, from the inquiry about the penis to the beginning; which causes them to look if the woman is pregnant, then know that they put their finger in her vagina and feel the penis.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	So if she is taken, remove that one from him, and then order them to cut on that one.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	Maybe if she is not pregnant, then order the married woman to put her finger in the patient's crotch and feel the penis, as she keeps her left hand over the bladder, and carefully touches that one.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	So if she is taken, then know that gradually she stretches that one from the orifice of the bladder to the roots of her pubic hair, and carefully brings that one to the patient's anus.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And then cut on that position of the patient' crotch, with the base of the penis facing towards her anus, and carefully insert the penis into that opening, and don't remove it from there until the patient comes; and his finger should not leave the orifice.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	The section should be small at the beginning; and then insert the finger into that section, and if she feels the penis, then adjust the section according to the quantity that you know the penis goes inside her.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And you know that the types of penis are many: some are small and big, and some are sharp and pointed, and some have bumps.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	So then you know how many types there are for the penis that you want to make a section on.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you want to stop the bleeding, adjust in that virulent spot and touch that one for an hour until it stops; then return to your operation before the penis comes out.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	Prepare those instruments that are described in the extract of the penis in men, so that you are helped by them in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you want to stop the bleeding, and you know that the exit of the blood is from the arnica that is inserted, then you pause powder on that spot and spray it with a strong spray and do not repeat that one; and leave the penis alone, and don'y extract that one, because a very heavy woman will die.
E aprop cura la plagua.	Then heal the plague.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	So when the acute pain subsides, the area softens, then return to your operation before the penis comes out.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter 62.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	On Section on Hernias.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	Hernia is nothing but an accumulation of moisture in the cicatum white, which leaves the testicles of the genitals containing the sperm, and it is called spermatic cord.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And some are inside the natural panniculus that prepares nature at the base of the sperm, before it becomes another testis; and it is the spermatic cord between the cicatum white that we have mentioned, and it is not water but fat.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the cause of this hernia is due to the injury that occurs to the genitals, so that this substance is discharged, and sometimes it happens due to trauma caused by an impact on the genitals.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this moisture is not of different colors, because the color of it or it declines to yellow or blood, or red, or black, or ripe, or white water, and it is that which is most.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the landmarks by which you can identify where this accumulation of water is: because if it is in the cicatum white that we have mentioned, then the swelling is rounded, declining a little in length like a testis, and appears the genitals, because the moisture contains all parts.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	If the moisture is in the proper panniculus, then the swelling is at the base of the sperm, and thus one estimates that it is another testis.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	If the moisture is between the spermatic cord and the cicatum white, then know that… (the text continues, but the sentence doesn't make sense in English).
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And if you want to know the color of the moisture in the swelling due to the shape of the injury; and according to the water that is discharged in the edge of the injury, judge from that which is inside it.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	So when we come to the cure of it, then know that you order the patient to drink if water is possible for him, and wash his feet.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And then let them lie on their back on a bed for a little while, and remove those sheets.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And then set yourself to the left of him, and order the minister to follow on the right side of him, who will extend his arm to one of two places at the base of the testis, and to the opening of the miraculous navel.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And then take a knife and cut the spermatic cord along its length until it reaches the penis.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And do the section according to a rectangular distance from the line that you should follow when cutting the skin of the genitals, until it reaches the cicatum white completely.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And remove that one, and observe, and keep for such an injury; and your removal of it from the base of the sperm as it is suspended on the testis more finely and carefully examine the removal according to the quantity that you can.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	Then pierce the cicatum completely with water through a large piercing, and drain all the water out.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	Then separate the two sides of the section by a nail, and extend the cicatum from its roots; and do not touch the spermatic cord that encompasses the genitals, and cut the cicatum in the manner that you can.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And cut that one in its entirety or in parts, and especially the lower part, because if you don'y examine it carefully, the water won'y return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	Maybe if the testis is removed from that one far from its cord in the hour of your operation, when you have completed the section of the cicatum, then return that one inside, and then adjust the two sides of the spermatic cord with a suturing, and then heal those other plagues, until it is healed.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you suspect the testis is corrupted by another plague, then know that you should adjust the vessels that are under the suspender, and remove that one, and then heal it with water that we have mentioned.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	Maybe if the water is aggregated into two parts, then know that there are two hernias; so cut that part according to what you have done in the other; and if it seems to you that it is an operation, then do it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	E then you shall wash the wound, and enter into the sections with wool immersed in oil or rose oil; and place another wool that you have immersed in wine and oil on top of them and spread out those over two genitals and the wonder of the womb; and open folded cloths and powders, and lay those open together with the thread which is according to this form:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	Then you shall place two cloths and wool wadded according to this form; and the extremities of them should be pressed with a cloth or wadded wool, and they should be added together with the straining in the breeches of the breeches, and one of the extremities should come into the other, and the second should come from the split of the pantyhose, and two extremities upon two spaces left and two extremities upon two girdles, and all should be tightened in the breeches of the breeches.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And some are treated with the hernia by artificial cauterization in place of surgery; and it is that you take cauterization with a sharp knife and cut there the thread of the genitals, and it ignites according to what we have said within that is uncovered the white container containing water, and then you shall take cauterization according to this form:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	and it is put together in Greek letter.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And then pierces that container, and it ignites within that all the moisture be outside-sent.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	And then extends the container with nails, and scrapes with nails, and scrapes with sharp cauterization; and scratch that according to what is possible within that you eradicate all of it; and keep yourself from the fire that the fire does not touch.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And you shall know that this operation is safer and farther away from the flow of blood, and better than surgery at section.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	Maybe if you cause a swelling at the time of surgery or at the time of cauterization, or blood flow, it is then that you cure what causes a problem to you by means of this remedy which leads to it according to what is said.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	Maybe if the patient is a bit poor, and does not hope for the second operation because of its horror, then administer perforation according to what I have said there; and it is when it is proven true by means of that water which we have said about signs, that this hernia is watery.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	And then it is said that you shall operate the patient upon some raised table, and pierce the swelling in the lower part of it with a blade, and place the piercing according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	and then be the wide opening within that runs all the water.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	And then place over the area cloth and leave it, so that it runs the content of the water.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then this remedy cures the area within that the plague is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	Maybe if contrariety is to the egression of water in that hour you pierce: and water does not come out but by means of that the white pannicle within the orifice of the plague causes contrariety and prohibits the flow of water, then it is said that you introduce into the plague a penalty or instrument from which water comes out; or adapt in the opposition of the plague a small one.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And you shall know that water returns, and is gathered after months or years; and when it is added, then pierce according to that method, for the patient will spend his days then.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter LXXXIII.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	Of Section on Fatty Hernias and Their Cure.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	You shall know that in section on this hernia is feared to cause harm in the major cases; but it seems to me that the dismissal of it and being saved by that is better.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And I am reminding you of the operation on that one and the spices of swellings.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, I say that the swelling is born in the bodies of those whose genitals are joined and it is made by other causes: or for acute excess of moisture which is spread in the genitals, or for impact.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And it is the color of swelling according to the color of the body, and does not turn pale in pain, and is a heavy swelling.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And there is a swollen lipped swelling, whose color is dark, and does not feel to the touch.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And some are made by pressure of the bowels, and by inflation of those as well; so that the reminder of it is perceived, or by inflammation of veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	Maybe water that is made by pressure of the bowels is recognized by the spreading out of swelling when you squeeze it with your fingers, and does not seem to be touched by you.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	Maybe water that is made by inflammation of veins is not spread out by it any cause; because of the compression with your fingers.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that on this species be made surgery and on the others flesh; and it is that you scratch the thread of the genitals, and then bring up the water from the parts, and undo those hanging down vessels, and tie them, and scratch those hanging down vessels further than those which you have brought up; and scratch those more than those which you have brought up.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Therefore, if the water is already consolidated on that flesh, then it is said that you extract the water and scratch that one.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is adherence within any cause of the container, or between that which is between the veins, then it is said that you undo all that adhesion and scratch that by round incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	Maybe if there is birth of flesh in the place of the adherence which is behind, then it is said that you scratch all that belongs to him; and extract the water as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when your operation is completed, then fill the plague with sheep infused with rose oil and wine; and then this remedy cures that one within that another cure is applied.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter LXIV.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	Of the Cure of Fatty Hernias, which are of the blood.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	It is seen that swelling wrapped in some wrapping like a bud of the testicles, and it is made difficult exercise and walking over the patient's body.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the cure of this disease is feared by means of that water from which remembrance is preceded.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, it is said that surgery is performed on that one as well; because it is said to make the first.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And I say that you shall operate the patient upon some raised table; and then bring up the hanging down vessels to the parts which are being broken by the wheel; and keep those other servants of yours, and extend those to the wide part.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And then you shall scratch with a sharp blade by section across the right of the hanging down vessels within that they are the uncovered vessels.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And then scrape all from the beginning as well as I have said in the removal of the bowels which are in the tempers.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And then place in those one needle which is double-headed, and place that at the beginning of the places in which it occurs; and place another one opposite to that one at the end of them.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And then scratch those in the middle place by section on the right according to the length of the body, and bring out that which is added to the noxious and corrupted moist.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And then this remedy cures the plague by the cure of other plagues in which you wish to heal being born; for it is not bad by means of that water from which the hanging down vessels are split into two genitals, because it is not good by means of that water.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	If it happens that all the veins are closed, consider whether the testicles have been removed or if the blood vessels to them have been cut off, by which means they would be deprived of all nourishment and be made withered and incapable of producing, or because they might not become fully developed.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter .lxxxv.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	On the treatment of intestinal hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The occurrence of this hernia is due to the incision which extends over the abdomen from the navel, and thus, if a bundle of intestines should be found hanging down on that side, it is to be laid aside with those of the other bundle.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture is either of the ciphac or of protrusion, and it happens for two kinds of reasons: either by percussion, or by a loud noise, or by a sudden movement, or by some other heavy cause, or by an apparent reason.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	And the sign of this is that it occurs slowly over a long period of time and not suddenly, and that it is accompanied by swelling inside the hernia sac before the bowel protrudes.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the sign of this is when it occurs due to an incision in the ciphac, for at the beginning a violent pain suddenly develops; and that it is accompanied by a swelling near the navel, and that the bowel comes out slowly, and the flesh over it separates from the navel.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	In some cases the intestinal sack is torn away from the bowel, and this is called an intestinal hernia of the inguinal region.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	In some cases the hernia becomes swollen, and in others it grows larger when pressure is applied; and sometimes a painful condition develops and increases when pressure is exerted.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the treatment of these various kinds of disease, great care must be taken, so that the cure does not make the condition worse.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And the manner of performing that operation is that you command the patient to return his intestine to its cavity if it does not go of its own accord; and that a cushion be placed under his chest between your hands, and his legs raised.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And then put the thread around the scrotum at its top, and cut it through both sides; and then place the two ends of the cut thread between your fingers, one above the other, as you would to tie a knot.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if the incision is according to the quantity that you can obtain from it, so that the bowel is torn away from it.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And then take off that portion of the ciphac which is left after cutting the scrotum; and that you may see the white, hard ciphac clearly on either side.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	Then you should cut through the testicle in that place where the ciphac is white; and leave the thread at the top of the testicle, and cut off that portion which is attached to the hernia on either side, and then free the adherent part from behind the hernia.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And then place the thread around the scrotum on either side, and stretch out the white ciphac before you to its left, and raise the testicle to the ciphac at the incision; and command the minister to extend that testicle above it, and you will dissolve the adherent part behind.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And search with your fingers whether there is any cause for the bowel to be wrapped in the white ciphac; and that you may see if it has become tightly wound up.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	If you find any cause for this, then you should place it upside down before your abdomen.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And then take an awl which is of the size of four threads, and pass it through the hind part of the ciphac, which lies under the scrotum; and cut through it with your scissors where you have passed the awl through it, and make a knot on each side; and fasten them together as tightly as possible.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And then wrap the ends of the threads tightly around them, and bind them together with a strong knot; and that you may prevent any cause from being transmitted through them which would produce an apoplexy.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And then take another thread according to the length of that first thread, and bind it to it as you would a knot; and then bind these two threads together tightly, and cut off the ends which are left, so that they do not become tangled again.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And then cut through the scrotum at that place where you have bound the thread, and bind it tightly as you would a knot; and thus continue with the treatment which we have described above.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And then administer the oil immersed in water, and pour it over; and administer the thread which we have described above (and sometimes the white ciphac is cauterized, which we have mentioned above, because sudden movements may occur due to a flow of blood); and let the thread fall where it will.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	If the patient's condition remains unchanged, then water should be added to it; and let it settle on that place where you have bound the thread as it has fallen.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And this is how you treat the wound with the other treatment of wounds, within which it is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter .lxxvi.
De hernia ventosa.	On Ventilated Hernia.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this type of hernia, it is not seen that anything has been burned by the treatment described above to make it well.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first people said that it is done in the same way as we have described in the treatment of the hernia; which is to lay the intestines out in the open place on that side with ease; and then dry them in their place, because they fall when a cold humor is applied.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And treat the wound as we have described above, until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter .lxxvii.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	On the difficulty which occurs in the intestines.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	And sometimes the rupture occurs in the intestines as we have said above, and the place is removed.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And do not allow any cause of the intestines to be allowed at the genitals; and if one is allowed, it is little; and return when needed.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	If the time is prolonged with water, it causes a small fissure in the ciphac, and then the intestine is placed within it; and this is how the rupture occurs in the ciphac as we have described above, and this is caused by the ciphac being spread out, and the place becomes swollen and oozes.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the care for him is to do the cauterization as it is preceded by the narration of him.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	Some are cured by pressing according to this method: and it is that the patient rubs his two knees between your legs, and you dry up the place of the rupture of the hernia by cutting along its length according to the quantity of three fingers.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	Then tighten the white rope that is under the cord until it is uncovered.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And then take the string and place it over the edge of the hernia, and press it onto the patient's abdomen.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	Then cut the two places that are on the edge of the string of the hernia, and adjust one stitch to the other.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	Then cut off the edge of the string, and do not pierce the hernia entirely, nor spread out the perineum in any way, or otherwise let me know about the treatment of an intestinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And that is cured with the cure of the blisters, and when you pierce the blisters, clean them up, and restore the blister in place before it hardens; for the hernia rope is contracted and the eminence of rupture is not adjusted.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	The cauterization is better in this place, because it is closer to healing.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter .lxviii.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	Of Softening of the Testicles
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	In certain men the testes are softened by water, because the flesh between them is softened, and care must be taken.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Then, it is necessary for him who is treated that he lie down according to his two knees, and spread out all the rope which is softened over the natural rope; and then let him adjust two lips to the stitch.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you want, cut off the excess of the softened rope with three or four cuts and a firm stitch.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	Then pierce between the stitches, and cure for the treatment of other blisters in place before they harden, and let the blisters fall off.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter .lxxxii.
De castracio.	Of Castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	You should know that castration in our law is prohibited, more so because I remind myself of it in this book; and it is not necessary to remember it except by two methods, the first being that so that this is in the science of the doctor when he is questioned about it, which knows the cure for it when it happens; and the other method is that we have had the need for castration of other animals for our benefit from them, namely, from donkeys, and horses, and pigs, and animals similar to them.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And therefore I say that castration is done in two ways: either by cutting off the testicles, or by making a cut and opening up to the inside.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	More so in that which is done by cutting off, the way of the operation is that you make a cut in the water tail of the animal until the genitals are soft and limp and hanging down.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	Then take them by your hand within that they remain relaxed and do not appear to be loose from the touch.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	More so in castration by making a cut and opening up, cover that you have the animal and press the rope of the testicles of him with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	Then take the suspenders, and pierce them on each side with one cut within that two cuts process.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	Then pierce those further that you may want to remove.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not let fall onto those of the rope for any reason, but rather the subtle rope which is over the veins.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	This method of castration is better done by cutting off, because cutting off strengthens the loins so that the animal does not desire to copulate.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	Then the blister is cured before it hardens.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter.lxxx.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	Of Hermaphroditism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphroditism in men is according to two methods: the first is that it appears as it does not have space in the rope of the testicles, being between two testes figure like a woman's cunt because of the pubic hair.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	Some of that man's urine is on the rope of the testicles.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	In women there is another kind: and it is that the woman's cunt over the penis is like two testes of man a little bit all together at the beginning of their foreskin, as well as two testes of man.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	The cure is of three kinds: of the two men and of one kind of women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And it is that you pierce those flesh according to the shape of those, so that it removes the odor of her; and then let them be cured with the cure for the treatment of other blisters.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second kind of men whose urine is on the rope of the testicles, there is neither cure nor operation for it.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter.lxi.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	Of the treatment of warts and of the flesh that is prominent for the reasons of women.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	A strong wart is adjusted onto natural causes within that it hardens and stops the treatment; and some women are enlarged in some women to such an extent that they break out into laughter as well as in men, and spread out until coming to coitus.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Then take the excess of warts with your hand or with a needle and pierce them.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	Do not end in incision, mostly on the head of the penis, lest it cause bleeding from the blood vessels.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	Then that is cured with the cure for the treatment of blisters before they harden.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	More so, naked meat is meat that grows in the belly of the mother within it, and it hardens very much so that it does not break out until it has the shape of a cow's tail (and I call it here "bad cow's meat"); then we pierce those according to what we pierce with warts, and cure those before they harden.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter.lxxxii.
De curacio de alratica.	Of the cure for warts and of prominent flesh for natural reasons.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Allergic is that the woman's cunt is not pierced, or it is a small piercing.
E es o natural o accidental.	It is either natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental is by bad meat which preceded it, and that is done or by naked meat that is adjusted or by subtle rope or hard.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	It is done or in the mother' head, or on her sides, or on the top part of her, or on the bottom part of her, and it prohibits touching and impregnating and having children, and very much it prohibits bleeding.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	The knowledge of that is done by looking at the moon, if the opposite is apparent, probably; but if it is not apparent, then you seek that with the help of a mirror or a string.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	More so if the opposite is by subtle rope, and it is closer to the two lips, then you pierce that with a needle or a string.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And it is that you pause on the two lips' powder, and then pause the thread of the needle or the string of both sides before you pierce them.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	The woman is on her two knees, with her legs spread out, and then she extends the two lips by force before that subtle rope of the hernia is broken and the opposite is apparent.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And take wool and send it in oil and place it on that spot, and rub the man with it each day so that the wound does not close up.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	If the scar is thick and thick, then cover that with a sponge of lime or a leaf of mint.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	If the obstruction is by flesh, then suspend it in oil, and scar it.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And if the medicines that stop the flow of blood from wounds are effective, then apply them with honey.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	Then administer a wide, brass syringe so that the plague does not close up quickly.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And hold it for several days and administer ale of lemon.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	Then let it be treated with the other treatment for consolidation so that it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And sometimes, in the greater birth of other animals, and then cover according to this method.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	If that is for hard lumps, and the hard lump in the greater birth is not opposed to being treated in some way.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter .lxxiii.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	Of the treatment of hemorrhoids and of tail and of red boil that happens in the vagina of women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids such as those of small veins that do not cause pain continuously; and if they are old hemorrhoids, then let them be.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And I have already said in the division the spices of those and their characteristics, and direct like that which receives treatment and that does not receive treatment.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	So say that lumps and nodules when they are in the greater birth and do not appear to be felt, then no treatment is done with iron.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	But those that are in the orifices of the greater birth above which there is a feeling, let them be treated.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And when you put the woman on her back and extend her legs with a cloth, or with a sharp knife, cut them off.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	Then sprinkle over those the powder of a wound from one of the powders scar it with a knife, and similar to those.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	Then dry their feet for an hour, then place them in boiling water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the flow of blood persists, then make a poultice with rice and mustard and similiar things.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	Then take flour and make a paste with honey and vinegar, and put it on his feet.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the wound is healing, then do so; otherwise, attach them to two windows, and make a scarification of his nipples.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then take wool and dip it in juice of coriander or of arnica or of grape, and attach it to the area; and cure the area with oil within that is healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	If your hand is not healed yet, then rub it with oil in which you have put mustard.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then heal that within that is healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter .lxxiv.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	Of piercing of the hernia in the greater birth.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Small lumps of hernia happen in the greater birth, such as small lumps and small boils and blisters and hernias and pustules and tails and other lumps.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	I have already said of these diseases and the characteristics of those and their treatments in the division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And when I say in this treatise of hernia what is done to the hernia that heals, and if you want to know how the operation is performed.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Then consider if the pain of hernia in its beginning is acute with percussion and pus and fever, and sometimes that hardens over it; then do not cut into it, but treat it with oil that helps with maturity until the sharpness of the symptoms passes.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	Then place the woman on a table that has two tables; and let her lie down with her back towards you, and extend her legs beyond her belly, and open her breasts wide, and pause her hands below her belly, and tie them together with a rope.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	Then the midwife follows behind and gives the instrument with which she pierces the orifice of the greater birth, the form of which will be determined in those cases that she will decide to do so.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And when you want to administer this instrument, you must stand behind the woman's belly with your feet apart; and that into which the instrument enters is only the woman's belly and her evil humors.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	If the instrument is larger than the woman' belly, then place a powder over the texture of her belly so that it does not enter the belly with any instrument.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And when you pour the liquid that runs out of the instrument from behind and the midwife holds the instrument and mixes the liquid before it enters the orifice of the greater birth.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	Then when you feel pain, and it is hot and wet, then cut off the top of it with a sharp knife.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	Then when the swelling is evacuated, then place a cotton swab dipped in rosewater or green water in which there is no stiffness; and pause the caloric7 in the section of the belly.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	Then wash the woman's back and chest with clean wool dipped in water in which are boiled purple flowers.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then let it be cured by two days of applying a poultice with oil to the area; and then it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And sometimes the woman's back and breast are washed with water that has been boiled with honey, then dip in water in which long raisin or almond leaves have been boiled, and then return to the poultice.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	If the swelling is inside the woman' belly, then do not administer this treatment with iron; instead, heal that with oil that I have said in the division.
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter .lxxv.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	Teaching midwives how to make a poultice when they are sick according to the following shape: not natural.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	Necessary cause is that the midwife should recognize in the beginning of natural childbearing by signs of her body, and it is that when you see the woman express herself to the sides apart and she wants to smell the air, and over it is covered with water that comes over her; and when she hears a sound from the baby, then know that this birth is the second shape of nature, and the first sound comes from his head, and the second is that he hangs or hangs on her navel.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Then when you see those signs, then know that the woman's belly is moving as if she were about to give birth; and let her lie on her side, and these extra movements are due to the child's head, and this is a sign of birth. And these extra movements are due to the child's head, and this is a sign of birth.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu .i., o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	If this birth is different and not pleasant, because the child is lying on his back and his head is lying over his chest, and his mother's hand is over his head, then know that it is not a natural or pleasant birth; for example, when the baby is lying on its back and its head is over its chest, and its mother's hand is over its head, then know that it is not a natural or pleasant birth. Or it is that the head of the child and the mother' hand are not over his chest, but his mother's hand is over his belly, and suddenly a great sound comes from him; then know that this birth is not pleasant or natural; for example, when the baby is lying on its back and suddenly a loud noise comes from him.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	For necessary reason it is for the midwife to be skilled and subtle in all matters, and that she guards against mistake and delusion.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And I am showing the whole figure of those, and what genius is in those so that it means for this and is standing on it.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When it comes out over his head by natural force, and that is violent on the woman and is put in a difficult part, and sometimes the virtue of it already exhausted, then make that seze, or that women have him, and evaporate his con with fennel seeds and with oil humitz.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	Then the midwife enters between his small testicles and splits it with him the second, or cut it with her finger within that it comes that is in it of humidity.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press the woman's belly within that it sends the fetus.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	Maybe if it does not send, then cover that the woman is cri-ti-rized of mucilaginous of fennel and of mucilaginous of fennel in cotton.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	Then command him, then the cri-ti-rized one, that it is compr-mued and make that she stornuda with condition; and to his mouth and his nose for an hour, because the fetus soon gets there.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if the two more of the fetus are soon get there at the beginning, then cover that you reduce those with facil-ity little by little.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	Maybe if it does not obey the instrument, then pause the woman over a table and lift her feet up, and then concuse the table on the earth; and the woman is held that she does not fall down the concussion.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the two more are not turned in and die the fetus, then incise those and extract the fetus or tie his neck with a rope and extract it with equality, because that one soon gets there.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	Of extraction of the embryo over its feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the fetus is on its feet, then cover that you push those in them, and then make that the fetus is small, and then make that it engulfs itself, and then make that you take a foot of it and extend those little by little.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	Maybe if it is already come into the space, then you command him that he presses, and make that she stornuda with condition, because soon gets there if God wills it.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it is not soon get there at the water that you have described, then return the fetus little by little until you pause the second natural figure, because that one soon gets there if it is taken in the water at all.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is forbidden at all the water that you have described, then take of fennel seed and of gum dissolved, and hit all in the mortar for good percussion, and then line-y it to the water of the woman, the most down of the belly of him.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	Then make that she makes a cut in the water tebez, within that she succeeds the hiccup.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when the partings of him are lessened, then make sub-fumigation to him of mint and sub-pause that to him.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when sub-fumigation for an hour, then you make that she is seze over a table, and then make that she stornuda and extract his mouth, and remove it from there, and press the second part less of the belly of him with light pressure, because the fetus soon gets there.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Extraction of the fetus over its feet and its mass.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the fetus comes second in this form, then you make yourself to enter the mass of him little by little; and the woman is evessed over his head, and her feet are put down, and those are lying on the ground, and close his mass.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	Then press over his belly little by little, and then extract him who is left the feet of him from the ears within that it is prepared in the second part less.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the fetus is not soon get there, then take the feet of him and move them with violent motion, and then press that is over the hiccup little by little within that the fetus can get to the partings above it.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	Then make yourself to enter its mass and engulf the fetus little by little, and then command the woman that she presses within that the fetus is soon get there.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Extraction of the fetus latutin-dimentially depending on one of its mass.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	Is made to reduce the mother's hand, maybe if it cannot do that, then raise the woman and make her go up.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if go up is not possible, then make that she rests on the ground, and make those of her concuss with violent motion, and then administer with care the things that you have described of mucilaginous substances.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if it is come the childbearing, then make that she is seze over a table, and then study on the reduction of the mother's hand, and engulf the fetus second natural figure, and make that the woman stornuda and command him that he presses to itself within that it is soon get there.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Extraction of the fetus over its head expanded its mass and the sole of his foot is placed on two of his mother's.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	Then make that the midwife has the hand of the fetus and then roll it little by little, and do with ease.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when is not yet engulfed, then pause on the water that you have described of oil and of mucilaginous substances.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	Then command him that he presses little by little, and when the water is made, then make that she makes a cut over a table and command her to be inclined on the right side, and then command him that he presses with care; and make that she stornuda with condition.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	Exit of the fetus is prepared on the side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When it goes out to the horrifying of the mother second in this way, then consider, and you make the second one with your finger within that it is evacuated of humidity.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the fetus is suspended over the face and the head of him, then consider that of the embryo, so that it is not retained and is safe.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	Then make the fetus to the partings within that you pause the second one, and then command the woman that she presses herself a few times, and he is soon get there if God wills it.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	Exit of twins or of many fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Know that twins are rare, and sometimes three or four, but at the water is strange and difficult to recognize; maybe there are natural causes, and not alive.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And count those, even if they are multiplied, a second one, and are separated by the cord, distinguishing between them in the navel of each one; and some vegus are soon get there thus, as it is already come into the world naturally, and others are soon get there if God wills it.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if they are difficult to understand their devises the childbearing and reach water that I have described of non-natural figures, then you take care of them thus, as I have described it.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the midwife is subtle and gentle water that makes with ease and subtlety, and with lateness, and is made to be subtle according to all figures as it is prepared with care for the good of the soul.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Remember that he who was formed in the womb from embryos and Aborted are.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Some veals are made in the mother one, two, three, four, V and VI, VII and VIII; X and already it is to be verified that a woman gets pregnant VI and another X for all formats, which causes fo made by measurement of the glorious wise men.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And also cover that it is in the science of midwives because it is very light at that little-seeming water, and therefore stop doing it to that water with a view to covering it.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter LXVII.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	Of the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you treat the dead fetus with water that we have mentioned in the division of medicine, and it does not come out by itself, then you must necessarily use surgery to extract it, provided that you consider whether the woman is of good health or not affected by any accidents for which it would be a needless loss.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Then return the patient to her side on her back, and have her head bent forward, and the space between her thighs raised up.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	And the minister should hold that of two parts or be tied in the side for so that the body does not spread out too much during the extraction of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	Then moisten the mother's mouth with olive oil and with a mixture of althaea and fenugrec and with a scent of lavender.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	Then the midwife should put the oil and mixture on her hand, and then make herself comfortable in the mother' side, and then feel with her hand for the position of the fetus' heels.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	And place it in a convenient position: then consider whether the fetus is ready to come out, and let it fall on her head, or let you hold its heels in the hollows of her back, or in her neck, or in her mouth, or on her palate, or leave it to grow on her beard, or to her collarbones.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	Or if the delivery is over her feet, then in the petticoat, or in the middle of her sides.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And she should hold the heel with her right hand, and place its curvature in that position between the fingers of her left hand, and then make herself comfortable and place the heel in one of those positions that we have mentioned, unless it reaches the cause of the delivery.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	Then place and hold another heel in that position, or the third if necessary, so that it does not slip out, but is held fast, and not extended except by its own power.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And so that the relief of it is complete from the very beginning, so that the removal of it brings ease when it comes out at its own time during labor.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And in the water that the removal is softened; and if any part of it is held back, then consider that the midwife should moisten herself with oil as we have said before, and then make herself comfortable in the water that has been retained.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Then if the fetus is taken out whole, then the heels should be switched places between the positions that we have mentioned before it is completely removed.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	Or if the mother's back is turned toward the other one, and it is not possible to reduce that part by the curvature of her spine, then consider that it should be wrapped around that; and then extract it before all of it comes out, and mark it or cut it in the joint of the spine or in the thigh.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And so consider that you pass into the other side, and on the two feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Or if the fetus' head is large, or it comes out with the curvature of the spine in the delivery, or is in the water that has been adjusted, then consider that you should enter between the fingers of the hand and open the head and extract the water, or break that one with a tool called "alundated", the shape of which will correspond to the shapes of the other tools in the chapter that follows this one.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And it seems that if the fetus is of a large head by nature: and then consider that you should mark it with a needle, or take it with an alundated tool as we have said before; and then extract the bones with forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head is delivered and curved from the collarbones, then consider that it be cut in two parts so that the moisture that is on the feet is spread out.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	Or if it is not complicated, and does not come out easily, then consider that you cut the head as soon as it is possible to extract it.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if those left in the womb are post-mortem or are in the water, then consider that you should pierce it where the moisture is located in it.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	Or if the fetus is over her feet, then its attraction is light and its direction to the mother' mouth is light.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	Or if the fetus is curved from the belly, then consider that you extract it with a drape wrapped around your hand, and cut the belly in two parts so that the water that is located in them flows out.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	Or if the other members are still standing and the head turns, then the midwife should make herself comfortable on her left side; or if the mother' mouth is open, then she should put herself into the position that we have mentioned before, and then feel with her hand for the position of the fetus' heels, and then hold them in its heel-hollows, or in the middle of its sides, or in its mouth, or on its palate, or leave them to grow on its beard, or to its collarbones.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mother' mouth is closed because of apoplexy and it is caused by the water that we have mentioned before, then consider not to make much noise when you enter; and first administer an effusion of warm water.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And then administer plasters; and follow the patient with warm water, which softens and moistens it.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the fetus is over her side, then consider, if possible, that it be cut; and water that we have mentioned before to the living fetus.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	Then, if water is not possible, then cut it in pieces and extract it.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And she should leave no cause remaining within the second one.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	Then when you have completed your surgery, then administer water that we have mentioned in the treatment of apoplexy and those other things that occur because of it from the mother.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if it is a flow of blood, then deliver it into clear water and administer the other treatment.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	You have already seen a woman in whose womb there was a dead fetus, and another one that was pregnant again, and a dead fetus has come out of it.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It happened to a woman that she had been pregnant for a long time because of apoplexy, and then she began to deliver a baby, and it was a big one, and it was getting out whole.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And you were called to treat her, and treated her for a long time, and the plague did not become solid.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then you continued to treat him with some plasters of strong attraction, and extracted an arm from him, and then passed a few days later, and extracted another arm; and you were amazed that there was no bone in the womb.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then you began to think that they were bones of the dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Then you cured the plague, and extracted some bones from him, and that woman was in such a condition that it was a small arm.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And I did not consider myself strange for it, but because in water there is science and assistance for those who have been given medicine by the doctor.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	From the forms of instruments that are necessary for extract the fet.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Shape of the device with which the mother is opened:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the shape of the strapping in which the free ends are folded together, where by folding there are two loops at the end of two strands.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	However this loop must be covered so that it is placed under the strapping, and that it is done with a needle or a stick of wood.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And be the length of each stick two times and half the margin of either one is a dit, and the length of either is one palm and half; and in the place of two sticks are two adjustments of that same sticks which are already closed, whose length is more than one palm and a little bit less, and the width of each is a dit, or a little less.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two additions are sutures in the mouth of the mother so that it is opened to those when you turn the two prescribed loops.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Another shape similar to that, but smaller and lighter:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	Made of wood or stick according to the appearance of pliers.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	However at the end of them are two additions as well, and the length of these additions is a palm, and the width of each is two ditz.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open the mother, then do so that she is lying on her back with her feet hanging, so that it opens between her thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	Then open your hand with the device as you would with pliers according to the quantity that you want of the impression of the mouth of the mother within it does not matter that the measurement makes.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The shape of the strapping which they called the ancient ones:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	Shape of the device with which it is propelled, that propels the fetus:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	The shape of a screw that twists the head.
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	It is assembled to pliers whose ends are separated as shown in the form of a screw, sometimes also with teeth along its edge, and sometimes also with teeth on the opposite side, according to this form, sometimes also, and these teeth are cut as shown and engraved and twisted.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	The shape of little screws:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	The shape of a simple spike:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	The shape of two simple spikes:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	The shape of pliers with teeth on one end and the other end closed by a hinge, so that the head of the fetus is twisted:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	The shape of a chisel with two ends, where the head is separated from the handle:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Two wide chisels:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All these instruments are prepared by the artisan, and when they are more numerous or less or more depending on the need of the doctor; it is necessary that the hands of the men be more agile for the work.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And you do not open these instruments now if it is unnecessary, because the need for them is not justified.
De extraccio de la segondina.	Of the extraction of the second one:
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second is held back it must be commanded to the mother that she hold her breath, and then open your hand on the mouth of her and on her nose, and if by doing so it is forced out, it is good.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	But if not, then take a ball and pierce the skin on top of the head, and break open its mouth with your fingers, and if necessary use a pinion to open it; and if necessary add an herb, and bind it with a bandage, and wet it with the water of Saint Gregory.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them are immersed in the water of the ball, and set it on fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And then place a straw tube in the mouth of the mother, and keep that water which vaporizes inside the cavity of the mother.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And then make the second one blow away with a puff of wind, and it flies out.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	If the curd does not separate, then command the mother to dip her left hand in olive oil or a mixture of thyme; and place that hand on the skin of the stomach, and introduce the second one that has been found, and when it is found again, take it out slowly little by little according to the rule that the mother does not feel any repulsion.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Until then, the two are left in their place without difficulty.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And it should be adjusted according to the amount of attraction, because she will obey and will avoid that attachment.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mouth of the mother is blocked, we have already described the treatment with a sneeze and with the water of Saint Gregory.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	If the second one is not found with all the remedies that we have mentioned, then you must not force it out by force, but rather cover it with a cloth and rub it with oil and tar; because that will make it more difficult to be removed, and when it is found again, it can be dissolved with a solution of alum and it will fly out.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	But when it is forced out, it will cause a loud noise to the head and stomach, and to the mother; and then place them under smoke and apply them according to their smell.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	Some of the ancient medicines are already known as a smoke treatment for the nose and dried figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	The shape of a device with which the woman is smoked, when it is necessary to control menstruation and the second one:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	Made of glass or porcelain:
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And the small end should be placed in the cavity and the wide end above the fire, and the smoke should rise from between its braids.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	Then hold that medicine inside until it is consumed by smoke, and repeat.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	Of the extraction of the child's bottom, which is not punctured:
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	The children's bottoms are not pierced; this must be done with care and a sharp instrument.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then command the mother to pierce the child's bottom with a sharp instrument; and if not, pierce it with a chisel, and be careful that it does not touch the liver.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	And then place a burning thread over that bottom, and cover it with oil; and then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	If you fear that it will be burned, then place a straw tube in the child's mouth, and prevent it from breathing while it is burning.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And this causes the child's bottom to become infected with pus or a abscess; then when that infection has healed, it is treated with water which we have described in the treatment of pus and tar.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	Of the treatment for the fistulas that they leave behind:
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistulas that remain after the delivery of the child cause a painful swelling, and the grossness of the pus remains away from the bottom or in the space between one part of it; this must be treated with a poultice.
E es una fistula o motas.	This is a fistula or a lump.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And with that swelling is aged and it dries up with white crusts or subtle rust, and some of those fistulas penetrate deeply.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those that penetrate are recognized by the water that is discharged from them and by their windiness; and some people sometimes use the exit of a fire, and some others break it away with a hard blow.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And some of those fistulas sometimes pierce the space within the bladder, and into the meat of the pelvis; and some others penetrate inside the joint of the crotch.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And in that which is known as a fistula penetrating the anus and not penetrating it, then put your finger called the rectum in the anus, and try gently to push or pierce the fistula when it is not twisted.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	But if in that there is a twist, then try gently to push or scrape the fistula with your finger called the rectum, until you feel the twist or hair on the finger.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel that at all nor make any type of passage of the bowels or worms or wind, then as I have said, know that it is non-penetrant, and put your hand on the cure.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula enters into the bladder or deep into the flesh of the penis, then the meaning of it is extremely urine from that and prohibition for it so that the area above it with medicine is hardened.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	But if it enters into the joint of the thigh or deep into the bone and causes pain in the circuit of the testicles, then its meaning is that the attempt has entered here if it is not twisted within the bone, and causes pain in the circuit of the exit; and that with time it is always damaged; and that it does not cure with that medicine, nor is hardened with poultice.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those fistulas that penetrate there is no cure at all, and the cure of those is work and uselessness of the medical leaves on which they are sutured.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	But in that which is non-penetrant and old, healing with iron is expected according to what you have recommended, and that which I have already told you and tried.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And that is because the patient's legs are placed above his buttocks and lifted, the cushions are slanted towards his abdomen, and a gentle attempt is made to push or scrape with iron, or a sharp object if it is in the fistula, until you know the area where it enters.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if that twists the patient' leg, then cover so that you do not enter your finger called the rectum into it.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	But if you feel the attempt already in your finger called the rectum inside that it is twisting and also feel something between it and that fistula, then know certainly that it is penetrating; and do not work on that, for it is not in that cure, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	But however, some say that it heals in certain men.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And of the medicine by which it is hoped to heal it gently according to the width of the fistula, then put that fire gently on the fistula before it enters the anus; and repeat that two or three times within that you know that all those flesh that are adjusted with that fistula are like feathers of goose.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And that cure with poultices wrapped in cloth before all those flesh that are adjusted, and with medicine that engenders and hardens it, and if healed, then it is good; and if not, then it is not healed by any other cure.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	But if the attempt enters and does not penetrate into the anus, which is in the buttocks, and between that and the attempt there is a slight piece of flesh or something, and the fistula goes where the surface of the flesh is cut, then dry the flesh from the beginning of the fistula, and see if it dries with the attempt, and if it enters into the fistula before the section reaches the place where it exits, then it is released and escaped through the attempt.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	Then untangle those flesh that are adjusted with a tube of goose feather, and do not allow any cause to come from them.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	But if there is a flow of blood between you and your work when you adjust those flesh, then the milk that is best and the instrument of pus is to cauterize with fire or acute medicine, for cauterizing with fire adjusts well: so it is adjusted from those flesh that are adjusted, and separates the three exsiccations from the moisture.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And that cure with poultices wrapped in cloth or wrapped three times before the place gets hot, and then cure the plague with hard poultices that generate and harden it.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And so medicines in which there is rigor and excision; when restored, then it is already healed and you do not fear iteration.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	But if the fistula has already entered into the perineum of the anus and is elongated from its surface, then enter your finger called the rectum into the anus and feel it.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And therefore, if you feel the attempt and it is slightly of flesh or something between you and it, then it is close to penetration; so there is no work in it but trust and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	That cause is administered in it one of three ways: either to cauterize that already said; or to dry that within which you can reach the cavity so that it is possible for your finger to enter, and the appropriate cure; and do not cut with a section so that you do not injure the lacuna containing the anus, and that you access to the patient' back only because of your will; and then cure that with water already said because it fortifies well; or to elongate that slightly and make pus that dries that within which you can reach the cavity, as we have said, either with the attempt or with another instrument with an acute end, and then untangle those flesh that are adjusted within which you can reach the cavity, as we have said, either with the attempt or with another instrument with an acute end, and then try to restore all the plague with a section, and if the pus hole above it is not hardened, and the fistula is open at the exit of the anus, and allow that pus to flow out through the patient' back.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And some times the fistula is finished according to this way: it is when you enter the attempt into the fistula, and it is on the buttocks' side towards the skin with the cloth, and in the margin of the buttocks, then make an attempt with an acute end, which is thus as a needle prepares the veins according to that form:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	and enter into that poultice wrapped in three leaves or around it; and then enter your attempt into the fistula within which you can reach the cavity.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	But if it is penetrating in the margin of the buttocks inside, then you take that poultice from there as far as you can enter your finger called the rectum into the anus; and take the end of the poultice and adjust both ends apart, and pull out one, and let it flow for a day or two, and when more times you insert the poultice into the flesh, then take it well between those flesh that are adjusted between the two ends of the poultice.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And then cure the plague within which is hardened and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	But if the orifice of the fistula is not penetrating, then make it penetrate in some way that you prepare it, but not in the margin, because it is not to you that you let it flow so that you do not injure the anus; and then make it within which is healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The shape of a needle that divides the fistula: its curve is sharp and the other side is not, so as not to injure you who are not necessary; in times like these.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	Of sutures of hemorrhoids where there runs blood in the incision of those.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Emorrhoids are as follows: either between the buttocks resembling grass that is of charcoal, or those are with grease.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And those are so small and great, and that the blood runs from them all at once, and they are only a few drops, and outside the buttocks, and in its ends.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	May be those who are hot in the buttocks according to the second of a little humidity, from which runs yellow or a little of blood continuously, and is according to the color of the body.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the cure for that which is inside the buttocks, is that you command the mallet to rub and squeeze in between the buttocks until they hurt and the hemorrhoids appear to you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you cover yourself and hang on to nails or whatever you have in your nail, and approach those spots with their little roots.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	If the nails do not have them in those because of the humidity of them and the softness of those, then take them with a rough cloth or with a piece of twine or with a piece of wool, and cut them at their roots, and approach them with sharp tweezers, and dust some fine powdered salt on them according to the incision, so that they are at those in place of cauterizing; or cauterize them according to what is preceded in the chapter of cauterizing.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And then cure those with the other cure before they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the buttocks do not obey to exit with ease, then rub the mallet with a small bite, and wash it with that water which is in the buttocks and which causes exit with ease when the mallet is rubbed.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	If the hemorrhoids are outside the buttocks, then the cause of them is easy to cure, and it is because you take them with your nail, or with a needle, and cut them, and then cure them with that water which we have said is inside, so that they are cured.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And that which you cut, cover it with a silk cloth and put the needle through it and approach the hemorrhoids from above, and make the needle pass through the little roots of them, and wrap the two ends of the silk cloth around the tip of the needle, and draw it up; and then stretch the hemorrhoid strongly, and then loosen the silk cloth and extract the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And make water on all of them, and leave one of them uncut, so that the excess blood from the main vein runs out of it.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And then place a cloth on the buttocks with rose oil or wax; and place that one on the buttocks and order the mallet to pause.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then leave it in place until it is completely healed; and when it falls down, cure those with oil or with another cure until they are healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	Of the cure for fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Mottled spots may appear because of dry skin or because of constriction by nature.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And if those old ones do not heal with the medicine above mentioned and with your nail, then cut them with a sharp tool or with a spatum within so that they are moistened and fed by the pus from above, which prevents them from healing; and then cure those after they have healed.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Then you burn those with a strong fire so that the first one which appears is scalded, and then cure those after they are healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	Of the cure for scrofula, it is as follows:
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	Know that it is necessary to cut it, and not otherwise, because it looks similar to a clove according to the color of the body, and it is spread throughout the whole body, especially in the feet and the toes, and by means of these you feel the pain of the main vessel.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And then cut it with a sharp tool or with a needle, and extract it from its root; and then cure that one.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you want, cauterize the second which is preceded in the chapter of cauterizing.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	May be warts are small, hard, raised pustules on the surface of the body, and mottled spots appear in most children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	The cure for it is that you spread it and cut it, or that you stretch it and burn it.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you want, cauterize it with fire or with sharp medicine as we have said above.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And they are completely extracted in this way and not in that with the tool which I will indicate.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	May be fever is a small, hard, raised, or pustular lump on the skin, which appears in the palm of the hand, and when it is touched it feels hot to the touch.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	The cure for it is that you take a pen of hen or of duck, and make it strong, and place it over the wart within its circumference, so that the circle of the pen contains the warts; then move your hand away from the pen, so that it cuts the blood supply to the wart, and then cut off the wart at its root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, make water on the hen or duck pen according to this form:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	May be the opening at the top of the pen should be slightly wider than the thickness of the paper, wrapped so that on the tip it is enclosed by it and then heated until it melts; and then rotate the pen.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you want, cauterize the wart according to what is said in the chapter of cauterizing.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	Of the shape of the tools that are used to give the bite.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Some spots are cured with silver or lead or melted wax or hammered bronze; and some spots are cured with small tools, because the one that is administered in the cure of small children should be small; and of those which are administered in the cure of painful or unpleasant things, the cure should be small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The shape of the large cure is small and the shape of the small cure is small.
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The top of the pen should be wide enough to accommodate the tip, and the distance between the tip and where it is attached should be determined by this.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the tip of the pen should be slightly wider than the thickness of the paper and smaller on one side than on the other; and it should be determined by how thin or thick the paper is.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And the bag in which the medicine of animal bladder or sheep's wool is placed should be wide enough and its root should be a palm.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And it should be pierced by sharp tools as it is rotated, and if the distance between the grooves is determined by how thick or thin the paper is.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And then place it in those grooves with a sharp tool that is made of iron, and adjust the bag to the warts; and when it is placed on the skin, keep it tight so that it does not move or slip; and then cure those warts with the cure. May be the quality of the cure for the warts is that you fill the bag with the medicine, which has been boiled according to the tolerance of the patient; and be careful that it is neither too full nor too empty.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	And then place the mallet on its two feet, and raise its legs to a height of about three inches; and then pour the cure on top, and then pour it with your hand into the bag, and squeeze out as much as can come out; and then remove the cure and the mallet takes its legs away from the wall.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine forces him to sneeze, hold it back as much as possible; and if he sleeps for an entire night in that position, it is more likely to be a cure.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	If instead you will use those in the solucions of the stomach and the cure for the hernia, then you repeat the cautery until it is cured.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if in the crotch are hemorrhoids or painful abscesses, then use a sharp and pointed cautery, of which the points are made to cut with ease.
De curacio de las plaguas.	For the treatment of pus.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	You have already said and I agree that the cure for those with pus is different from those without it, and I say the cure for them with medicine according to the complement.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore I say that pus is diverse according to where it is formed and according to the location where the pus is formed.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes of pus are also caused by a bad diet, incisions with a blade, stab with a lance, cut with a knife, or similar to those who cause the pus from its causes.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	And the pus that is in the body parts are also caused by a plague that falls on the head, neck, foot, stomach, back, and similar to those of the limbs.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And I recommend the cure for some plagues so that that reasoning and rule is not applied to other plagues.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And I will begin with the simple plagues of the head, because the remembrance of the composed things will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Therefore I say that when a simple plague occurs in the head and it is not a fracture, then consider: if it is due to a bad diet or from a similar cause, and it has already been broken by a club so much only and it is a great plague and you fear for the patient's life from an abscess of pus, then you must cauterize and wash the head frequently, and do not delay; and extract according to the quantity of its virtue if there is no more cause to prevent cauterization, more so if the plague that has been caused is little.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And be cauterization of what is opposite to the plague that has begun; and keep the patient from repletions, and from eating and drinking gross things.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	And if by moderation there is no more cause to prevent, then lessen the food and do not bring it near meat or wine.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And wait for the plague, if it is an abscess that you cauterize, put a sharp needle into rose oil only or into wine in which it is strained.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	And if you are sure that it is an abscess that has been cauterized, then wait for the plague, if it is new and the air has not changed that powder that I recommend to put on.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed that, then wait for a wet day inside until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	And if the plague is great or it is caused by an incision of a blade or similarly, and their lips are not adjusted for the puels, then adjust those with sewing according to what I recommend about the sewing of them.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	And if the plague has already been discovered from the bone and it is not retained but only a small suspension, then incise that and cure the plague with medicine and restore the meat to its place from a club, and order for the patient that he eat food of which it is gross: cheese and milk and beef, and cow's udder, and sheep's blood, and pork.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you smell a putrid smell in the club and it does not adhere to the bone, then you cut it all and pour it out, and then cure it.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	And if in these plagues there is an artery or vein through which the plague flows out, and it has not been cured with medicine, then you inquire about the artery, and if you smell that it does not subside, then you cut that with a blade, or lacerate it; and if necessity compels you so that what we have said does not conform to it, then you cauterize it until the plague is gone.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these plagues are simple and small, then the cause of them is light; therefore you powder those with that powder, because established it before the air changes that.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	And the way of that powder is this: prepare rose oil from one part, dragon' s blood from two parts, and non-extended causes from three; all mixed together and shaken well, and if the plague is filled with it, and compelled by good constriction until it sticks to it, and coagulated with the blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And you put that over the puvils and let it sit there, and do not release it while it is like that so that it is not an abscess, because it is not extended from it the medicine before it is healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And never use that powder alone for cauterization when you have not mixed it with rose oil and dragon' s blood.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And this mixture of operation should be done in great plagues when it is necessary to pause them over those and let them sit, and only recently suffered plagues with their plague, the air has not changed that.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has changed them, especially in summer, then do not put that powder on, but cure those with water that we have said, whether you pause over those wet day by day, or over their feet of flour with water and honey within that it is a poyredura; and then cure those with other treatment until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	And if it happens with the plague that is a fracture in an oss, and it is small, then you extract it with care.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	I direct the cure for fractures of the head in that which is venomous.
De las plaguas del col.	For the crotch's plagues.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	And if it happens with the plague in the crotch, then there is a difference in treatment, and between the plague of the head when it is simple.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	And if the nerves of the crotch are incised or arteries, then they are not treated with that which causes violent constriction, as with mustard and salt, because it damages the nerves and prevents them from healing; therefore you avoid treatment for those nerves with water that causes a stinging sensation.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not pause over any plague by reason of all is fresh, for the substance of the nerves is fresh and the continuation of it is to the brain, which is the pus from all the limbs.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if that is cured with light medicines, so washed with warm water, and a small amount of rose oil or not-rose oil, and heated when it is washed with warm water, and let them sit in the oil.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	And if the plague is great, then administer sewing, or tighten their lips; and then cure that with powder until it is healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	And if the plague has depth or happens to the pus that is low in the hole with a poyredura, then pierce that in the deepest place.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	And if the plague has already been incised and there is a flow of blood from the plague, then separate or dry that, or cut that with a blade, or cauterize it if necessity compels you to water.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	And if the spine of the neck has already been incised or all, and the veins of the crotch are saved, then you adjust those labias of the club with sewing on the hair of the neck and do not touch that; at once take off that and reduce it to its natural figure, and fasten it with a good constriction; and let it sit for some days; and then cure that with water in which stinging nettle and excitement are added until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	If the plague has already made its way into the bone, then strike it with your hammer, and if there are pieces of bone that can be removed, take them out as much as you can; and if that is not done, let it remain where it is so that the plague can rot away from it, and separate it from the rest of the body to be made clean.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the plague is new, then sprinkle on it the powder that I have recommended for you.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	But if the plague is made by a fistula, then heal it with the help of the medicine that will come from the place where the fistula is.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Of the plagues of the neck or of similar things when they break out between the shoulders and are caused by a spear, an axe, a sword, or a similar weapon.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is struck by a spear or an axe and the depth is known, then consider whether there is wind from the plague as the patient walks; know that the plague is deadly.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if there is no depth to the strike and the plague is new since the last sacrifice, then pause in it at the first hour with powder, and do not press too hard so that the sacrifice does not remain in the depth of it and returns to the body, but rather pause in it a wet substance, and rub it with two hands for three days.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the ointment is not with you, then pause in the orifice of the plague until it sucks up what there is of moisture; and let the patient lie down on the plague so that it runs out what is in it.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	But if three days or more have passed since the plague appeared and there is no spasms, tremor of heart, or constriction, and sometimes other good dispositions of it, then know that the plague is cured; and heal it with water and with the other cure within so that it is healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	But if the healing of it is delayed and has already been opened for a long time, then know that it has already turned into a fistula; heal it therefore with its capital.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the plague is by a spear or an axe and it is simple on the surface of the foot or leg, then heal it with water that has been preceded by sutura, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	But if the plague has already gone into the bone and has already separated these parts, then twist the plague and pull out those parts, if they are separated.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	But if they are not separated, then leave them as the plague rots in it, and the extracting of it is made clean.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And of the other accidents of the plague in the other members, the cure is the same as that which we have said.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of the plagues of the belly.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The disposition that occurs in the belly is great or small or moderate.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	Of the great convulsions there are the bowel or nerves of the bowel, so that its intersection takes place and its sutura becomes more violent and more subtle.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	A small disruption is difficult in another way, and if you do not protect yourself from the intersection of it in its place, for soon it will open and become thicker so that the instrument of it becomes difficult to handle.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And therefore the best disruption is moderate, for in this there is no difficulty in reducing the bowel, and it can be done with ease on both sides that have been mentioned before.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And know that the sutura of the belly is second to four ways, but two suturas are common which are also applied to other plagues of the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And two proper suturas communicate with the other plagues, but nevertheless only one proper sutura is made in the belly.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	I recommend to you all that exposure and explanation.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	So say that when the plague is small and there is no cause of the bowel for it, and it is difficult to reduce it, then it happens in one of two ways: either by the small disruption as we have said, or when the bowel is drawn back by the cold air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And therefore, when it is like this, cover that you cut off from the bowels before you dip a sponge or a damp cloth in cold water, or take water from a stream, and from a spring, and from the sea, and immerse it into the bowel until the inflammation is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And some have found that water that has been made cold by being exposed to the air, and it is better than cold water alone in resolving inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And if you see that the inflammation is resolved, then wet the bowel with water that has been made warm by the sun, for by water it is allayed because of its few causes.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	But if the instrument of it is not suitable for this cure, then cut off the disruption with a small instrument that has been used for hemorrhoids.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And the first cure is best when it is proper that there is no sectioning off, and no occupation to cut off at need and to starve it.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	As for the instrument, consider its shape:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	The first choice of it is acute, and the other not acute, and at its end subtle, but not as subtle as spasm, which is somewhat blunt.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And therefore, when the plague is increased and there is a bowel outside of it, then know that its reduction should be according to its natural shape, in its own place, if possible on top of it, for it is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	But if the disruption is great and it is in the upper part of the belly, then let the patient lie down on his back, and pause his head further than his feet; and if it is in the lower part of the belly, then pause the head of the patient towards the feet, and the feet further than the head.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And in general if the disruption is in either of the two parts of the belly, then pause your intention and your contemplation always in one place so that the part on which the plague occurs is higher than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And therefore know how to administer to the great plagues and to the moderate plagues.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in the small plagues, then prepare water that is at hand, and make the ministering between your two hands, which have the whole disruption with them, and adjust their lips, and discover the cause of the suture somewhere else.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	And this is the common way of suturing: one in which you hold the needle, or count the needle according to the quantity and the width of the plague; and then let go of the end of the disruption of the little finger, and tighten the needle a second time, so that it does not fall into the two extremities of the knot, but rather leaves them behind the extremities of the knot, so that it enters from that part; and you have added the two extremities of the knot and the two extremities of the thread, and there are four orders.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And then strengthen the wire double in the course of the needle, and some loops of two parts together, and then add the two lips and the plug by addition; and then leave the thickness of the thread and make another hole in that place, and then tie it up to the first hole; and do not stop to do so if it is necessary to add needles before you have completed all the knot of the plug.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And the needles should be little between thickness and subtility, for the needles subtilely cut through the flesh very easily; and the thick ones are of difficult use in the thread, so that by that means they should be little both in thickness and subtility.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And do not stop that the needle is fixed in two points of the thread close to each other by means of, lest the flesh be cut very easily and the plug be made before its consolidation.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And are not prolonged with a thread so that the plug is not prevented from solidifying.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And then cut the ends of the needles so that they do not hang on the patient's leg and place your hand over the sutures with dust spread from all sides, which have the ends of the needles; and leave them inside until you know that the plug has already hardened.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	And these species of sutures with needles are most suitable in small plugs, for until the sutures there is a needle or two, and tie them up.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	Might the second suture be made in this way: and it is that you bring together to the suture all four ends, of the thread and two extremities of the knot, in a loop, with the needle in the middle, little by little and gently; and leave them until they are hard.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And then when the needle has penetrated these four ends, reduce the needle from that middle point in which you began, so that the wire retreats and comes out of the second loop on top of the plug, so that the suture is a second stitch on a piece of cloth, which is strong.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And leave between each stitch the quantity of the thread's thickness less.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this stitch will be known to men.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And at that stitch I had cured the patient who was in his belly, who had been struck by a knife, and it was the breaking of the main plug by two palms from the patient' side, which was a rupture of a palm in the middle of his member; and then I reduced that piece until the budel has been broken for twenty-two hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the plug was hardened in the space of ten days or so, and I cured him and made a hole with needles and thread for that reason, and it was agreed to make him well.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And the other members had not been cured; and by a miracle it was healed, because I did not cure him with the ointment, for it was in a place where the ointment is not taken or any medicine, but I placed on the plug a piece of cloth twice a day and washed it well with water from honey within that it was healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	Might you make two species of sutures proper to each other's narrative of Parola.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And it is that you begin with the suture of the thread, and put the needle into the hole inside of the hole from outside.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And then when the needle penetrates into the thread and in that same point of knot and along all the body, and leave the end of the knot in which you have put the needle; and make the other end of the thread penetrate inside the hole from outside to the hole inside, and leave it.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And then when you have finished that penetration, then you will make another penetration with the needle in that same point of knot and along all the body, and leave the end of the knot which you have made; and make the other end of the thread penetrate inside the hole from outside to the hole inside, and leave it.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And then make that penetration with your own hand with which you have made that penetration in the knot and along all the body, and leave the end of the knot which you have made; and make the other end of the thread penetrate inside the hole from outside to the hole inside, and leave it.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And then begin from that point and cut it with your own hand at the end of the thread which is in the knot and along all the body, and leave the end of the knot which you have made; and make the other end of the thread penetrate inside the hole from outside to the hole inside, and leave it.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And then make a loop with a thread and another loop within that one so that you make the whole knot according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the whole sum of this way of suturing is that you stitch with a thread to the skin, and not to the hair; for example, you sew the knot one time on one side of the thread's end, and leave that other loop complete inside.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	Might the second species of suturing be known as the suture of Gualia, and this is said by him to be done; for example, you stitch that other half-loop with needles in which you put some medicine, and not to put it on the skin; for it is that you apply the end of one part to another part of nature in which it is convenient; and you apply the other end of this one to the end of the other, and so is done according to what I have told you.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	And then you put the needle in the end of the hole from outside to the hole inside, and make that half-loop with needles in which you put some medicine; and not to put it on the skin; for it is that you apply the end of one part to another part of nature in which it is convenient; and you apply the other end of this one to the end of the other, and so is done according to what I have told you.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	And then you turn those loops around, and make that half-loop with needles in which you put some medicine; and not to put it on the skin; for it is that you apply the end of one part to another part of nature in which it is convenient; and you apply the other end of this one to the end of the other, and so is done according to what I have told you.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this way of suturing is better than the common way of stitching, and is a stitch which I have remembered before.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is said by Gualia
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And may they say it, a stitch of the belly is made correct with two needles, so that you put this needle in there, and begin with the needle' s work; and make that needle penetrate inside the other part according to the way of stitching those which I have sewed together.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And you know that when the rupture is in the middle of the belly, then the stitch of it is more difficult than that of the other places of the belly.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	And the judgment of medicine for the disease is different from the other diseases'.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	And that cause is why when you get the disease recently before it is changed by the air, and reduce the intestine and stitch it together well; and then place that powder on the skin.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already changed the plug, then place that powder on the skin which is in your presence, so that it does not make a hard knot and do not get stuck; and let them be hardened knot and hole; and then heal that one like those others within that it is healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	And if you do not have any medicine with you, then place that powder for half the time, because it begins to burn, and change that piece twice a day; and make those two pieces of thread between those days, and teach them how to do this, so that they are healed, because you do not want any other medicine in these situations when the diseases are simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	If you fear that the plague will spread to the main members, then cover yourself with wool wetted in oil of sumerge or rosewater, and place it on the circuit of wounds between the thighs and leave the bandages there.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if they feel pain or putrefaction in the intestines, for it is often seen, then rub that area with a black poultice and more so if the putrefaction has reached the intestine and an exit has been formed penetrating into the cavity of them.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And know that the pus that comes from the intestines is lighter in healing than that which comes from the small intestines.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And it is difficult to heal because the intestine called "gegunu" does not receive plague that enters it all; and this is because of the great multiplicity of veins that are in it and because of its magnitude which is in those, and because of the subtlety of the body of them, and because of their proximity to nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	But if what you are treating with is plague, and you have recently opened it, then follow the recipe of your doctor for treating intestines.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	But if the space has passed and it is already green or black, then place a poultice with blood on the area that has been damaged by them, so that blood flows from it, for in the intestine there are veins and arteries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	Then cut off another piece of the same thread, and place its two ends pendent on the edge of the hole through which the plague enters them, so that the attraction of them is relieved from your body, so that the shelter of the intestine and emission of the pus of the plague may be prevented.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remind yourself of the plague when it happens in the intestines.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When a disruption happens in the intestines and it is small, then it is possible that it will be restored in some men, because thus has been seen before that one who was infected in the middle part of his stomach with the point of a lance, and that plague was old and had become a fistula, and from it there came pus and water.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Then follow the cure of them already known that it is not confined in the healing of them, but also remove the pus that makes the wound heal and consolidates the area.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	Then see the consolidated wound, and place on them the patient's clothes that you have over the injury in his belly; and do not put anything that would cause a bad accident and break their natural dispositions to eat and drink, and then bathe and exercise them.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	Then said some experienced ones that when you get plague in the intestines and it is small, then tie them according to this way: and it is that you take a knot of those large knots; and then place one of these knots on the two lips of the plague and tighten its mouth, then when you put it on them and tighten their mouth, cut off the head of them, because they adhere to each other and do not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	Then place another knot near the first one, and do not stop making knots all along until you have tied all the plague.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	Then remove that knot and tie the plague together; and let those heads remain attached to the intestine until the intestine is healed; and do not cause any harm to the patient.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the intestine is tied with a thin thread which comes from the intestines of animals because it is fine in its length; and it is that you take the end of these intestinal threads, and if it is dry it will be torn, and then bind the end to another thread that you hold, wrapped, and then introduce this thread into needles and tie it with the thread that comes from the intestine, and reduce that one to a disruption.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	This way of sewing with knots is just another trusted and hopeful way.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	But if the plague is large and widespread, especially in a small intestine, because then only subtility can be achieved, and it is not healed by them at all.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	Of treatment with oil of zuchene and fistulas.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	Know that any plague and pustule when it dries up and becomes old, and is a ulcer, and does not consolidate and gets pus all the time and does not dissolve, then in any member it is called universally a fistula, and we call it oil of zuchene.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And the fistula according to truth is a nodacion felted, hard and white which does not hurt and at which there is a depression like a wound; and so it is named that one of some rice, that is pain.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And in wet men, which gets water; and the water is removed from it in some hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And sometimes this moisture becomes dust, and it is little, and it is thick, and it is subtle.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And I have already seen before said that this division exists, then when you say the plagues, that all ulcer which is not healed or in it is raw flesh, is caused by one of these nine causes: among which are the following: because of a cold wind on the body; or because of bad medicine; or because the wound is infected with corruption; and because of the quality of the matter that comes into contact with the wound; or because the medicine is inappropriate in healing it; or because it is corrupted in the region, and so it becomes a pestilence; or because of the property of the region, and when it happens to be at Zaragoza, where the digestion of bad things is difficult, and therefore the healing of pustules is delayed by nature; or because there is an ossicle or several bones.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	And all these causes have been shown, and they highlight those and the treatment of them with medicines in the division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	Then know that the treatment of fistula, which is achieved by surgery.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And know that fistulas happen in all parts of the body; for some of them reach the veins and arteries, or the nerves, or the cipha (spina), or the intestine, or the bladder, or any of the cavities, or any of the joints composed by means of the main bone and of the hand; and from those are that they give proximity to the main member and similar ones.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And therefore that one of those fistulas which is according to this way is of the difficult healing plagues, and they do not receive cure, and they occupy themselves with that work and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	But if one of those fistulas is so deep that it reaches the areas that we have mentioned, and you wait and trust in the healing of them, then try to make it by fire or iron, and if the fistula follows the recipe and you inquire about it with them.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	But if the fistula is twisted, then investigate it with subtle lead, because lead with its lightness relieves the curvature of the body which causes this twist.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula is large and horrendous, it is impossible for you to mean anything about it with attempts.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Then seal the orifice by sewing them up, because the moisture that you use to clean it up will run from one hole and go out through another.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	Then inquire carefully, according to which way you think it is possible that you recognize if here are bones or nerves, and this fistula is distant or near, or it is a fistula that has only orifices and is over it all with the whole of your strength, with your burial, for which you bury the patient, and from which you extract the cause of pain by compressing them with your hand over the area, and the signs of the symptoms and causes of the accident to the pustule.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have considered all of those things to be true, then go to the treatment according to your confidence: and that is that you consider whether it is a fistula that appears close to salt or far from joints, or nerves, or arteries, or veins, or one of the places that I told you about.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then you shall cure it according to what has been said before about its appearance: and that is if it is in a filth and of corrupt meat, and if it is born in the orifice of the flesh, or of a tooth, or similar, and treat it inside so that it be healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	But if the fistula is of great depth and follows the rectum, then cover it up as much as possible, and clean out all corrupt meat; and introduce sharp medicines wrapped in rags, and introduce them into the cavity of the fistula, which you have understood.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And do this to it several times so that the sharp medicine corrupts all that is rotten in the cavity of the fistula by the corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	Then restore it with a good poultice that heals the healthy meat within so that it be healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	But if it is not healed by this, then you shall cauterize it according to what we have said.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	But if the cause of the fistula is bone and you are certain of it, then you shall examine it and cure it according to what we have said; and if you do not find any cause of a vein or nerve or main member nearby, as we said before.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is discovered and it is in any corruption and darkness, then cut out all that is corrupted; and cure it with sharp medicine so that it be healed.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it does not heal and the pus flows out like a spring, then you will know that you have not completely eradicated the corruption; and then discover again upon the second aspect and accurately examine it and clean it up with a strong medicine, and restore it.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And if it is healed, then you will know that it is; but if not, then you shall know that the corruption is in the depths of the body, which you have not reached, and so go on searching for it.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the bone is corrupted in a small part, or if you can reach it, then throw it with forceps that are suitable to it.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if there are any bones, then carefully extract all of them, and leave none behind that could cause trouble with your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	But if there is any cause of moisture that causes an odor and there is no mistake or error in it, then cut off those limbs or meats if they are here, and set free the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	But if you have not prepared yourself to hang the bones of your own body, then suspend them by a rope that can bear the weight of those bones, and leave that which is inside with those bones of meat and limbs, and keep the weight that has not been hardened, and the section that you have cut be bound so that it does not come apart.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	While you are waiting, if you fear, then suspend them in a vat of oil that is three times its depth, or in the Egyptian unguent, or in any of the green medicines; for when those limbs are rinsed, and the bones are separated from the meat, and this attraction is lifted off, it will be pleasant.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	But if it is a large bone like the back or chest or thigh, and if what is corrupted is only the surface of it, then cut off that which is rotten and black, and restore the weight.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	But if what is corrupted is a great part of it, and the corruption has reached the bone's marrow, then you must cut off all of it and cut into that place where the corruption has entered; and cure it so that it be hardened.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I recommend to you that you go to a man in your service so that he suspends it by a rope, and assists you in your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	He sent for a young man of about thirty years of age, who suffers pain in his side, and if there is any separation inside it, then examine the matter inside the body by what comes out of the body, and it is matter that is thick, and he does not have an external cause.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And then he sent it to be examined by the doctor in charge of such cases before the apoplexy becomes great, and he ordered the movement of the tissues, and the cure was begun inside that the back is fistula, and the orifices from which all the pus comes out are poked and the moisture of the body.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And then many doctors were called in for about two years, and I was not included in their council.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And I saw the back of him and the matter that ran from those orifices for a great distance; and his body was completely weak, and its color was yellow.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then I inserted my hand into one of those orifices and felt the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And then I searched carefully all the orifices and found that all the separations of the back come from there.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then I went to my room and examined one of the orifices carefully, and discovered a separation in the bone, and it was rotten, and it had already been broken and corrupted; and one part of the back had separated from that which was inside the ilium.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then I quickly put the bone in order so that it be ready for me.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And I recognized that what was rotten was not in the bone but in a place where it had separated; and I had already removed all that was separated.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	Then I completed the restoration of the weight with solid medicines for a long time, and it did not solidify.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	Then I went back and examined the bone again on what I had discovered first, and continued the corruption to the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And I made sure that there was not any more corruption in it, and then I went to make the cure of him and complete his restoration, but it was not completed.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then I discovered another place on him and did not cut it into pieces in order to make the cure of it, but I cut it piece by piece carefully and made the restoration of him with medicines, and it was hardened slightly and healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And there was no need to repeat the surgery of him or cut it in pieces but because of the patience of him and his lack of fear and his concern for death from a sudden collapse due to excess vomiting, which happens to him at any time because of the discomfort.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And so he was healed completely, and nothing remains of the bone that is tough; and it returns to its virtue, and it is changed into its former state, and does not cause him any trouble in walking or any other thing.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	But if the bone is prominent in the place where it should not be cut yet, then you shall cut it according to this manner: and that is that you hold the bone at the end of the bone that is prominent, and order someone to stretch it; and then stretch that part of the flesh that is next to the bone, and extend its end so that it can be cut by a sharp knife; and then you shall cut the flesh from the bone, and you shall discover the bone with a sharp knife.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And let the table be placed under the bones properly, because when you do so there is no prohibition against the saw that does not cut through the corrupt meat.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And so that the saw is working on the spot of corruption little by little, because if it is in the cavity of the bone and does not appear in its appearance to the sense, and forces the saw to be seen from another side.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is corrupt and not prominent, move one piece continuously towards the other, and the corruption is in a place or part of it, then you uncover all the meat completely; and let the table be placed under them, and let the saw work on that spot until it is done properly, so that the saw continues working on the other side.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And so that the saw works according to the place of corruption a little, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is in the joint, then cut that joint that is corrupt, and saw the bone where it continues from the other side.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in reason but in one.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the chest of the body or foot, it is difficult; however, when you ask about the place where the corruption appears to you, and cut it off, and make it according to each disposition that you can do so, and if there is no harm in doing so, then correct it for you, because it does not go against your will.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And you should know what the instruments are for cutting these bones and how they are prepared, and their size, subtlety, greatness, smallness, hardness, and rarehood; therefore, prepare all kinds of special tools suitable for that operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And you should know that this operation requires the use of specific tools, and how long and careful your study and practice of this art should be; since, if you have not done so before, first learn about the appropriate tools for each type of surgery.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And I will give you the list of instruments that you can use in your surgery, simple ones for the beginning, so that you can practice without difficulty what I have told you about the operations on the body.
Forma de serra:	The form of the saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Another form of saw:
Forma de autra serra:	A different form of saw:
Forma de autra serra gran:	A different large saw:
Forma de ray:	The form of the raze:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	The head of this raze should be according to the shape of a star's claw, and the points of it according to the shape of the points of a key.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And you do not want to see them, except that when they are deformed or corrupt in the joints, and if the mouth is wide.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	The form of a larger raze among the others:
Forma de razori menor:	The form of a smaller raze:
Forma de razori lat:	The form of a lat raze:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	The form of a different saw made in a certain way: Let the saw be placed under the bones properly, and let it be made from iron with keenness, and make the member of the body with knives properly cut.
Forma de lu:	The form of wood:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	The form of a raze with a concave shape:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	The form of a different subtle raze:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	The form of a different curved-end raze:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	The form of a small raze resembling a tentacle:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	The form of incisor tools that cut the bones properly:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	The form of a different smaller incisor tool:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	The form of another incisor tool resembling a raze and the end is like a saw, and it is exhibited in many places in the joints of the bones:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	The form of the raze that is used to cut through the bones properly:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And the end of it is triangular and has an acute tip.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	It is made of Indian steel, and resembling all that we have said about razors, incisors, and saws.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	Of incisor ends and the serration of the bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	And the ends should be used for an intrinsic cause or an extrinsic cause, or as you have treated that corruption with medicines and cure does not confer with those medicines, or sometimes the corruption is caused by a member who does not affect any cause, then know that you cut off that member where the corruption appears, so that the disease escapes through it from this member.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the sign of that member is blackened, so cut off that member where it has burned up the whole body, and if you are not sure whether it is blackened or not, then cut off a part of it, and if it is blackened, then do so; otherwise, leave it.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	It is similar if the corruption is caused by some poisonous causes, such as a scorpion, a snake, or a vulture, and of other kinds.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if corruption or percussion is at the end of it, then you cut it and do not give space for corruption to enter the body.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And if you approach the body, then you cut that which is at the end of the limb, and do not give space for corruption to enter until it reaches the arm's joint.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if instead of that you cut the arm, then you cut the arm at the elbow joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if another corruption and turn around the thigh, then it is death for the patient; and other causes are not necessary to cure them, because there is a quantity of virtue.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And if corruption in the shape of the foot, then you cut that which is at the end of the foot, and do not give space for corruption to enter until it reaches one of the toes.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if you take hold of the toe of the foot, then you cut all the foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	Or if it is possible to get under the knee, then you cut the back at the joint of the knee.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if corruption has already entered under the knee, then it is only necessary to cut it and leave the patient to die.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	And the way of cutting the limb or of sawing it is that you tighten the ligature in the place where you want to cut, and another ligature on the spot; and extend the minister a ligature at the joints apart, and extend another ligature on them; and you separate the flesh which is between two ligatures until all the flesh is exposed; and then it is cut or sawed.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And when a strip of linen is placed on all joints in such a way that it does not touch the spot, and so that it comes to the patient's injury with just a bandage and poultice;
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	Or if you work blood when it is hot, then you cauterize the spot with care, or apply some powder to tighten the blood; and then return to your medicine until it is completed.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then tie the aching limb with a ligature at the joint, and care for that until it is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And I recommend to you that a man in his thigh, this is the accident which has happened to him, the which was assembled with fire that was burning.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	That corruption first happened in the limb which hangs down all the foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that man prepared himself for that injury more than the cure came to the limb with great speed which he had because of his pain and his heat, and he cut that foot at the joint, and fire healed it.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	Long time happened to him that corruption in the limb of the body, which is below the knee, was assembled with fire.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then I struck him, and so my piercing went over the body of the patient for a moment, approaching the purification of his skin; and that piercing did not continue and began to go into the other limb at the joint where it had begun in the body.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And then I called on him to cut the body of the patient, and I did not want to give space for that piercing of his superfluitat, and more than that I had to do with the cutting of the body of the patient because his virtue was in his destruction.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And then he went away from me, and he returned to his land and came to me that man prepared himself and I cut all of his body, and it was healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I do not add to this story except that it is an aid for me who encounters this disease, and by which I am understood, and by which I turn around.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	For the cure of wounds and with the quality of a poultice with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When a puss forms on some large member of the body and the space of the puss is prolonged until it connects with the wound, then it is broken and pierced, and the wound comes out from it as if it were a vessel, and the seam that has opened it is sewed up with a thin thread, and it does not spread to the bone or to the nerves or to the ligature, it is called a sinus, and it is not named a fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	But if the space is prolonged until the corruption approaches some member, then it is called a fistula and not a puss.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And the cure of it is that you cut that seam all around, and mainly when it is made thin and sewed up with a cloth, and check that it does not stick to the spot because of its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	Or if you hope that the seam will adhere and that that corruption has not reached the back end, and the seam is open on one side, then you care for it with a poultice.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And it is that you consider the sinus, and if it is large, and the arm which you have is very foul smelling, then you poultice it with an Egyptian medicine which is of oil, and vinegar, and honey receive parts mixed together, and make them fit into a vessel, and place them over fire until the medicine becomes warm and reaches its aim.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And then you take from it water which is necessary and dissolve the honey in it; and poultice it with that sinus, and tighten its orifice, and place the medicine in it for two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And then you take it out with care; and water it for many days until that sinus is purified and its pain is relieved.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And some are poulticed with ash water, when this medicine is not presented to you; and it is that you take the ash from fire, and place it on the water; and then take it and poultice it into the sinus, and tighten its orifice, and I am told that the sinus will stay closed.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the patient has no tolerance for Egyptian medicine or ash water, then poultice it with honey and water and mix together vinegar, and poultice it with that mixture, because of the properties of honey is that it purifies and washes away, and the vinegar binds the sinus, and mainly when there is superfluitat of stiffness and dryness.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you make water for some time and are told that the sinus is relieved, then poultice it with water which causes the flesh to become firm.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And it is that you take from the oil of roses and dissolve that which I have mentioned in the treatise about oils, or that you poultice it with some medicines and wet others which have their properties, as those which I have described in the treatise on ointments.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the orifice of the sinus is narrow in which the poultice does not reach the bottom, then you increase it little by little, and stop up a few times wrapped with an Egyptian ointment or with basil ointment until it is increased.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And if the orifice is wide, then you add sutures to its sides and leave the quantity in which there is added between the poultices because it is a wide opening.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the orifice of it from which the arm comes out is raised above the joint, then you dry it in the pus base where it is on top because when the arm is confined in the sinus space the flesh remains in its place.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it is not possible for you to cut the sinus out of its environment, the base of the bone, then you pierce that member as you prepare it so that it runs away easily according to how it is dressed, and so that it does not keep any cause of the arm in its place.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And take medicines that are placed on the sine of convenience to the water that you want to extend those over a drape of linen.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And the drape be of such a great quantity that it makes the communication of all the sine; and insert your scissors in the right side of the orifice of the sine a loop somewhat wide enough that the orifice of the sine, and extend another drape over them of linen with water according to the amount of the loop, and place it by position far from the orifice of the sine so that the vomit of the arm is removed and does not come in contact with the drape great but next one day a turn around.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	May that is above the orifice of the sine, which remakes every hour so that escapes that is placed in it of linen and does not come out again.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And so you will know if what comes out from the arm is much or little, or whether it is digested or not.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And so you consider the place of that sine, if in it feels the patient pain or no, and whether is in him apoplexy.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And if your medicine is prolonged in this way, and you see the matter that is placed on the orifice of the sine has already been adhered, or has become adherence, then take it out or the third day, and when you remove the drape, change it with another and renew the water.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	May if from the sine comes a subtle virus, then do not despair of the adherence of linen, for the healing of it is obtained, because in some men the generation of flesh in the plague lasts, and in those is made the opposite of it.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if from the sine comes much pain in a digestive way, then you will know that the sine does not adhere; and if the adherence of the sine is prolonged and causes this, then you adjust the medicines to be dried up, and if the medicines are moist in their substance and in their virtue, are dry them with water with salt.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the last to treat it is that you take of water with salt and dissolve it in oil of rose, and be put on it a piece of wool, and use that one.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And already seems to be done in that action, when there is no pain, take water with salt and dissolve it in oil of rose, and use that; or take myrrh and aloes and knead them, and powder all over the honey where it is placed that is thick, and put it on a drape and tighten it around the sine; and roll the one over the other.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And some times are administered to it a long-winded aromatics and razors of celestial lily (and is the celestial lily) and flour of erys and centaurea, and use them simple or adjusted, knead them and sift all over the honey that I have recommended; and cover with it.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the sine is prolonged and not healed with this treatment, then you will know that the corruption is in its root, and it has already been done an inquiry in the bones or in other hard members or to the ligaments; then you treat it with a treatment with a tube, when the wound is cured.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	Of treatment of sore and fingernails rubbed and incision on finger added and section.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Is a sore and the nail rubbed and incised on the finger added and sectioned.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And so when you have that one with water that I have said in the division and do not confuse your treatment, then you cut all the excess that is rotten from the nail and cauterize the wound there, for cauterization is useful in this case.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	May if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and those additions of the nail are already taking up the flesh on the inside, and it begins to sting and bite that one, then you pause a sharp line of water from the roots of the nail that stings the flesh, and pour that one over it and cut it with a pointed instrument; and place that one over it and cauterize it with a burning instrument so that it is burned up; and cure that one with water.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	May if the corruption has already penetrated into the bone, then you cut that one and remove it, for no time is healing that is done which is in it corrupted.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the corruption and the corruption go to that finger, then you cut it according to that one is remembered, and cure that one inside so that it is healed.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	May if to the nail there is a percussion or an atricion, and that there is pain there in it, then you cut the bad one, and immediately dry the nail with water by making a transverse section on top of it, and keep so that the section does not reach within the flesh which is under the nail, for you make the bad one cause a pain violent; and afterwards causes a birth of the flesh that is placed. And cure that place with water that gives pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	May is placed, which is born in the most of some men, very much is meat all; and very much is meat in it bones, or very much is meat in it nail.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And some are born in the root of the joint, or are born in some fingers of the hand or foot.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	May those that are born in some fingers of the hand or foot do not hurt; and those who are born in the joints very much hurt.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And of those that are born meat, the section is slight, and it is because you cut out the root of that one with a sharp instrument.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	May if he is born in the roots of the joint, the treatment is difficult; and so you should guard against the absence of him.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	May if he is born in a finger, then you cut the flesh of that one with a round incision within the bone, and close it with a sharp instrument; and cure that place inside so that it is healed.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	May the consolidation that happens to them between their movements or by birth of man who is born there in it, or by consolidation of plague or by burning of fire, or by similarity; and so you dry that consolidation inside so that they do not return to their natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And then put between them those drapes of linen impregnated with oil of rose so that they are not hardened; and separate them or place between them a thin piece of lead so that it is hardened according to what you should do.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And by similarity if it happens consolidation in some fingers on the hand or foot, then you dry that consolidation according to how it is prepared and fit it to the form of the member.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	Of incisions, these are varicose veins.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	And varicose veins are thick veins full of excess fluid that comes from the members of the body, and more so in the legs, and more so in the hands of those who travel or work a lot, and most in the hands of travelers and workers.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	And so if you administer an infusion of black cholera a few times with the help of a strong wind, then draw blood from the patient's basilic vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	May the treatment of them be according to two ways: one is that it is cut and blood drawn from it; and the other way is that it is raised and all blood is drawn out.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The first sentence translates to:
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	Then give it to him and order him to refrain from black poultice-making.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	Then repeat the cure by bloodletting when veins are filled, and inform the mule of this.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	But if the hair of the mule is long, and there are no beads to cut off, then trim it with a comb and a sharp knife, then dip it in water until it is damp; or exercise it by walking much, if bathing is not convenient for you, so that the member becomes swollen.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	Then dry the tail in the right place of the vein by cutting it long or short at the back or at the front; you can cut it if it is at the front.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	Then open the tail with your nails and cut off the vein completely until it is seen, and if it is black, then it will turn darker.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And if you are done with that, and from the tail there remains a white cord, then it should be tied.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	Then tie those two legs together where they are raised and the tail is hanging, and hang them by a weight of ten or twelve pounds.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	Then dry another section near that one for three fingers, then cut off the tail from the top of the vein until it is seen.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	Then raise that one and cut off that one in the back section, then pull out that one from the top of the second section until it is cut off, then pull out that one from the middle section.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	Then take it so that you pull out that one from the top or bottom of all the sections until all is cut off, then cut off that one.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if you do not obey me and do not cut off and raise it, then put a sharp needle in your hand, tie that one and pull it out, or turn it over with your hand so that it is twisted all around.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And be careful that it is not cut; for if it is broken, it will be difficult to raise that one and it will come back with pain on the mule.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	When all is cut off and gone, then put the foot in its place, dip it in water that is rose-colored and not rose-colored, and cure it where it needs to be cured.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the blood has been contracted and is twisted in the joints, and it is not second right side as I said before, then cover that one completely with a bandage, and hang it by a weight.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And be careful that you do not cut off the vein or hurt that foot, for it will be difficult to raise that one, and use your caution in that foot.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	Shape of the incision made by the scalpel when the vein is dried up:
Forma de unci orp:	Form of a hook:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not sharp like a hook, and it is not of acute extremities so that the vein is not hurt; and it is of great flexibility, for if it were subtle, I would cut off the vein because of its subtlety; but with this great bulk, I have said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	Of the extraction of the blood from the leg.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is found in the legs, as it was said by the Athenians in the land of Arabia and in the dry lands of India, which are few and dry, and there is neither grass nor shade.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And strong veins are found in other parts of the body except the legs.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And the source of it is putrid matter that comes from inside the body, as snakes, worms and scabies are born between the tail and flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	And the sign of its coming is this: the vein begins to swell violently, then the area becomes hot and swollen, and then it breaks out like a plant.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And then let him come out; that you wrap yourself over that piece of lead from which is the weight of one dragon; within two dragons, and no more; and place that and leave the lead suspended from the chest.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And as many times as you see that there is a reason for the joint to be outside, wrap it in lead and weigh it down.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if it is prolonged, then you cut off one part of the body and wrap it up; and do not cut off that one because it will contract and go into the flesh, causing abscess and putrefaction in its place, and a bad ulcer will form.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	So that it is treated gradually and is taken little by little, until it is completely cut off from the back of the body, and does not hang for any reason in the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And this vein has been measured in men who have up to twenty palms' length, and it has already come to me to measure one that is of thirty palms' length.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is cut in the hour of its medicine, then insert a sharp knife into the root of the body and pierce that one with a long knife, so that all the matter inside it is destroyed, and give putrid medicine at the place for several days; and then cure it from ulcers.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein has caused several rashes, and more so when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and it comes out as orifices, and is taken from each orifice.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And then cure that one completely as I have said before, at the end of the foot.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	Of the cut above the worms that come out under the skin, and it is called bovine disease.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This disease is called "bovine" in all countries, except for the Athenians; and it is a small worm that is born between the tail and flesh, which goes into all the body, causing pain and breaking the tail; and it appears with the same feeling of illness as the cow's disease.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And its source is putrid matter from some humors when worms, snakes, lobworms, and scabies are born in the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	It is feared because of its evilness; for when it enters the body and rises to the head, then it passes out into the belly, causing great pain; and there are worms in it.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And then when you want to treat that one and pull it out, then do not do so without taking a walk; and the feeling of the body should be taken away from it, and if there is no difficulty in pulling it out, then dry it completely over it and pull it out.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is hidden in the flesh and you do not feel it, then stop the cauterium on that place where it lies, and the main cause that is feared is corruption of the body with putrid matter as I have said before.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	May you never send that one to the head, then tighten your hand around the eyebrow with a strong grip, and pull it out; and if the mule needs to be cured of its bad odor, use medicines that remove putrid matter, and do not give any food to generate it.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	On treatment of illness by surgery.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This illness is called in our land nafir, and it is a pain that affects some members, and is exchanged from one member to another.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And I have already seen the second which I will recommend to you.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	A woman with illness was brought to a village, and I discovered her arm swollen and found in the vein of the arm, and as it continued to swell for an hour, I saw that swelling move away from it little by little, as if it were living silver flowing from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	Then the pain in that area stopped and remained in the muscle, and for another hour it stayed there.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And then he went to the other side to reach the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And then he told me to turn over completely, which I saw; and it astonished me greatly the change of position and the speed from one member to another.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I have already seen this before in my body according to that way, but I have never seen the change of position and the speed from one member to another as it is now.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	But I did not see such a thing in the woman's body.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I did not think it was water, but because the woman was young, and her arms and veins were covered, and in this way the sensation of cold changed.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	It is necessary that it does not appear according to this reversion of pleasure in those who are happy and have healthy veins.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And when you want to treat the patient, and he feels that pain, then do not appear to him as if he had said, then you will strengthen him on that and let it go lightly and dry on that place so that the wind is prevented from entering, and cauterize the spot.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	But if you do not see the veins of the body, then treat it with hot drinks and expel the winds with pills of fenugreek and of licorice and of seeds.
De extraccio de sagetas.	Of extraction of arrows.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrows are different according to the spices, and according to the places of the bodies in which they are planted, because their diversity is that some of them have large points, and small ones, and concave, and flat, and solid; and that some of them have three angles, and those to which they have tongues, and those that have blades.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And that which is according to the members and feet in which it is planted is according to two ways: because the principal members are concave, that is the brain, the heart, the neck, the lung, and the lungs, and the bowel, and the bladder, and their likeness; and when you catch one of these members with a deadly arrow, which I will recommend to you, then cover it so that you do not extract that arrow from those, because it causes death. And then extract that arrow from those in which death does not come, because it is not buried in the depth of the member, then treat the wound and cure the plague.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And as for the serval's neck when you catch an arrow in it and pierce the bone, and is injected into the cerebrospinal fluid which is above the brain, because violent pain, and scotoma, and vertigo, and stiffness in the nerves, and inflammation of the tongue, and convulsions, and confusion of thought, and choleraic vomiting, and a strong pain disappears the word and destroys speech, and is injected into the location of the plague with white fluid like pus, and has the appearance of moisture on the flesh.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And so if these members appear to you, then you abstain from treatment and from extracting the arrow, unless it is outside the body.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	But when an arrow has struck the heart, and is close to the left breast, and feels that it is stuck in hard tissue, and does not cause pain; and a strong movement of the arrow is like pulse movement, and the plague goes down from the extremities, and a coldness comes over them, and a hissing sound, and fainting; and if you know that death is near when all this happens.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And when the arrow has struck the lung, it sends out a bubble of plague, and the vessels that are close to the neck spurt out, and the color of the patient changes, and he exhales great breath, and seeks air.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the arrow strikes the membrane that is in the foot, and the pain then occurs near small ribs, and makes a great sound with a painful noise, and all the body's muscles tremble.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if an arrow strikes the stomach, then there is great pain with no nausea.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if an arrow strikes the abdomen and is stuck there, then there is a tear in the gut or bowel, or the bladder, which bursts, and there is no hope of extracting the arrow from the body by its extraction.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if an arrow strikes the bladder and causes a lot of urine to flow out, then know that there is a great cause near the outside, and the pain on the patient is strong; then you will know that it is deadly.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	But the other members are saved according to the major dispositions when the arrow does not hit a vein or an artery, and is not a poisonous arrow.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I will recommend this to you, so that you know about the nature of these arrows for treatment.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	That is the cause, because in a man an arrow is struck on the lacrimal bone of his eye at the root of his nose, and I extracted it from him with the other side, left the ring of his ear, and he was healed; and it did not occur to the eye of his nose.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	I extracted another arrow from a Judge, which struck him on the cheek of his face at the root of his ear, left his eyelid, and that arrow was hidden; and it was not possible to extract it completely, because only a small part remained attached to his jaw. And this arrow was a sharp one among the arrows of the Turks, with a lion's head at its end, and it was a great arrow.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And that is the Judge; and it did not occur to his eye, and he was not injured in any other way.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	I extracted another arrow from a Christian man which had struck his neck, and it was an Arabic arrow, and that is the one with ears; and then I inserted a sharp object between two guides, and it was submerged in the neck of him; and then I carefully extracted it, and he healed the Christian.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	I extracted another arrow from a man which had struck his stomach, and I thought he would die of it; but then, because thirty days had passed and there was no change in him according to the major dispositions, I inserted myself into the arrow and removed it, and he was healed, and did not occur to him.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	I also saw a man in whom an arrow had struck both his thighs, and the plague was consolidated on him, and then he went to the forest, and I extracted the arrow from the root of his crotch.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And I also saw a woman to whom an arrow had struck her abdomen, and the plague was consolidated inside her, and she did not change in her nature according to the major dispositions, and the woman did not harm anyone by her natural tendencies.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	Here is the translation of the provided text into English:
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	Then he removed the arrow from the Prince's head that was stuck in his nose, and had already fallen on the right side a little, and the whole of the arrow was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And he was called to the cure of him soon after the arrow was lodged; within three days.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then I found the arrow's pain gone straight away; and then I inquired that subtle thing, and didn't feel it; but he felt the punch on the right ear, and then he hoped that the punch was from the tip of the arrow.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And I spread out the poultice on that place with an adstringent and digestive virtue, promising myself that if the place was clean, it would show me the spot of the arrow, so that it might dry up on it.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And it didn't happen in the accident that the arrow had reached that place; and I continued to spread out the poultice on him for several days, and nothing happened in the accident; but the plague became solid between those days, and it broke out of his nose again on the third day, and he showed me the spot of the arrow.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then I put on him an acute, corrosive medicine for several days, till it burst open, and then I inquired that, and found the tip of the arrow, which was attached to the bowstring.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And then I applied to the plague with that medicine, within which I could see clearly the tip of the arrow, and it came out to me in four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And then the plague became bigger, and I tried to reach it with pincers, but it didn't break or move, so I used another method: I hung it on a hook, as it was described in the book at the end of the chapter, till I removed it; and then that plague healed.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And some doctors said that the cartilage of his nose was not restored, and I restored it, and the plague became solid, and healed the patient completely, without leaving any scar.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I recommed to you the quality of extracting some arrows, that you regulate and interpret them as above, because the parts of this art and the definitions of those are not understood by me through narration or comprehension of those books.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the masters know a little about it, and they interpret what is here and what isn'y; and they invent new operations and new instruments for the removal of foreign causes of disease when they occur.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And therefore I say that arrows are not discharged from the members in which they are stuck, but according to two ways: either by attraction of the place where they enter; or by the reverse of the other.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is discharged by the place does not have a specific exit; or it enters into flesh and is discharged outside.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if you don'y obey the hour when it is caught; then know that you must leave it for several days before you can find the meat that is around it, and that attraction of it and its exit are different.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	And apparently if it is stuck in bone and you don'y obey the hour when it is caught; then leave it for several days, and return it to attraction and moisture every day, and it will be discharged.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if you don'y obey the hour when it is caught for several days; then know that you pierce through the path of the arrow in that bone from all directions with a subtle tool until the spot is enlarged by the arrow, and then extract it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the arrow is stuck in the bone of the head and it has already penetrated into one of the cavities of the brain, and appears in the patient' side for several days; because if the arrow hits the skull, death will be prolonged.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrow is not stuck but in the middle of the bone and doesn'y penetrate into the cavities of the brain, and lasts in the patient for several days; and does not happen to him any cause of those accidents, then you must use your skill in attracting the arrow and in attracting him.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	But if it is stuck and you don'y extract it; then you put the arrow in its path again with the hand, and then heal that place till it is healed.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	But if the arrow is already stuck in the middle of the bone and it is painful; then you inquire that subtle thing, and if you feel it; then you use some tools that are suitable for attracting him.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you can'y reach him by the constriction of the plague and its length, and there is neither bone nor nerve nor vein; then you go under the plague till it is enlarged, and you can extract the arrow.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if you reach him through his ears that are connected to the bone, then you free the meat in which he is stuck from all sides with all the tools you can use; and invent something about it if you don'y reach the ear with those tools.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you administer the extraction of the arrow from any place where it is, then use the twist of your hand with pincers at all turns till it obeys; and use subtlety after subtlety so that the arrow doesn'y break and you can extract it by your difficult attraction and extraction.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you can'y reach him in your hour, then leave him for several days till the parts that are separated from him join together again; and then return to him because he is relieved.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	But if you feel opposite feelings of heat and cold, then administer to him what I have said about the cure in this book.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And preserve your skill in cutting off veins or nerves or muscles, and administer to him any device that is suitable for avoiding the arrow; and do it easily and calmly and slowly and securely as I have told you and what you heard.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And therefore that you oppose the arrow so that the patient is according to the figure according to which it should be placed on him, because it is more convenient.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	But if that isn'y possible for you; then administer to him what is possible according to the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	But those arrows that are discharged from one side and that enter another part of the body or that hit another part of the body before being discharged; or that makes the tip of the arrow touch the skin above it slightly; then you cut off that part; and extract the arrow because it is easily broken.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	But if it is stuck in the bone; then you twist your hand according to the opposite feeling, until the arrow pushes against the bone, and enlarge it, and extract it.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	And otherwise, leave him for several days; and then return to him within what is necessary.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the tip of the arrow is in that place; then you push it with your hand.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	But if the tip is stuck; then you use a sharp instrument to push it between the bone and the arrow head, and then push it with your hand.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	If the needle is concave then you push it in strongly as the needle is relieved by it.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the needle is poisoned then cover all the meat where the true is placed if it is possible for you, and approach cure that if it suits you.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the needle bites into the foot, or into the belly, or into the bladder, or into the ribcage, and it is close so that you touch it with your hand, and you can dry it over it, then dry it over it and guard against a cut of vein or nerve, and pull it out, and if you feel ill, then apply a plaster until it is healed.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Form of forceps for the arrows to be shot:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	When they take the ends of their bow that are made with an awl, and they hold it with a pair of pliers so that they do not let go of the arrow.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And of these are made special threads, large, small and medium, according to the quantity of the size of the arrow and its slenderness, and the tightness of the plaster.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	Form of pushing convex from this concave end with an awl so that it is relieved the instrument of the arrow in it, and push from that solid:
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Form of pushing from a solid end:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	so that it is relieved the instrument in it from the concave arrow, and is pushed with a raze.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	Of surgery of veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so .xxx., de las quals so en le cap .xvi., so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	Veins of surgery of which the bleeding is customary to take place from 30 to 40 drops, and of which are in the head. of which are two pulse veins that are applied to the ears, saying hello; two herbs that are in the two temple apparentz; and two veins that are in two lacrimal veins of two holes that are called aspicents; and the prepared vein in the middle place of the forehead, and the vein that is in the end of the nose; and two guides that are to the throat; and two veins that are on the right lip; and two veins that are on the left lip; and - these veins are called algelic -; and two veins that are on both sides of the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so .v.; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	Then the veins that are flebbotomized in the feet are 12; For the head it is one cerebellar vein, and it is called wild lat, and the people calls  “venas de todo el cuerpo”, and basilica is a vein that is applied to the domestic lat, and it is called citillar, and those call vulgar “vena del vientre”; and from the arm, and it is applied to the fire, and that one is flebotomized, and it is that appears clearly on the pout by a manifest appearance; and the salve, and it is the vein that is between the little ear and the mouth of the little, and there are two ramps.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And in the foot and the leg are three veins: the first of those is that it leaves on the curve of the denolh of the wild lat; and the second one is a small vein, and its place is left to the camba of the domestic lat; and the sciatic vein, and its place is left to the camba of the wild lat; and in the camba are other veins similar to those.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The youth of the veins that are applied to the ears is small and soft and spreading and healing of the head of the old bad.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of bleeding those is according to whether you are hot: it is that the head of the patient is shaved, and rubbed with a warm cloth; then return the patient's hair to its place in two places behind the ears that are submerged on the head; and wish them with the hand, and if you feel the pulse of those with your hand, here there is no attempt.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Then you take the lancea cutelar, and that one is incised; and then you push that one below the vein in the knot until the blood comes out.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And then raise your hand to the vein and the knot to the sides of the patient; and cut that one with an incised knife.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And be the length of the cut the quantity of two drops of water; and it is made there a hole as large as a pin.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then tighten the lances and leave it to heal.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And already has preceded in the beginning of this book the incision of those and their cauterization.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	The youth of the two veins is due to the old emigrant and the evil one that causes the eyes to cry often and the blood runs from acute excess through the holes.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of taking those bloods is according to whether you are hot: tighten the patient' hair to its place in two places behind the ears by means of a knot, so that the pulse can be felt with your hand; and if you feel the pulse of those with your hand, then there is no attempt.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	Then you raise the knot above the vein to the sides of the patient with the hand, and push that one below the vein in two places by means of a cut; and then tighten the lances and leave it to heal. Then make those holes as large as a pin.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then release the patient' hair from its place; and stop the pulse of those for an hour, and then stop it with a lance and tighten that one with a strong pressure, and leave it to heal.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And already has preceded their remembrance, and those the incision, and their cauterization in the beginning of this book.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And therefore the youth of the vein of the forehead is due to the old bad ones of the face, and to the emigrant, and to the pain and the ulcers that cause the stench.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of that bloodletting is according to whether you are hot: it is that the patient's hair is pulled tight, and a bandage is applied to its place so that the vein appears; and then take the instrument which is called a fossori, of which this is the form:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then stop the pin that is prominent at the head of the fossori on that vein and hit it with a hammer or another cause in the way, and leave it to run according to the quantity that you want; then release the patient' wound and tighten it to its place so that it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	And some wounds are applied to the bloodletting foot, but it is not said that the bloodletting is of an acute extremity as those others; before, the bone is near and strong; but the bloodletting should be made transversely, because the os is propda and fort and would break in it if the bloodletting were subtle.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	The youth of two veins that are the lacrimal ones of two holes by the pain of the hole for the old one and the stench in the holes; and to the bad ones of the face.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	And the quality of that bloodletting is that the patient' hair is pulled tight, and those are bled; and you stand on the head of it.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And the bloodletting is made in a transverse way of a little length, because it is not meat there; and if the bloodletting is subtle, the end of it is broken strongly.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Then let the blood run freely according to what you need; then stop those with a knot, and tighten those with a strong pressure, and then release them.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	May the bleeding from the nose be related to acute fever and bitter soda, and with facial disorders and headaches that occur in the face, more so when they are old.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of the bloodletting from him is that the patient tightens his hand and draws it to his left side, and takes the bloodletting subtly long and keeps it in its place in the tip of his nose according to rectitude, for the vein does not appear here, and because the blood begins to flow so soon.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	So that you finish the bloodletting little by little and allow the blood to flow according to your need; and then tie it with a knot, for it is restored somewhat lightly.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	May the healing of bloodletting from two lines be a constriction of bile and the beginning of leprosy and other bad diseases and sudden headaches and painful ulcers that corrode like herpes.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And the quality of the bloodletting from them is that the patient tightens his hand on each one in his collar with a thread; and the artisan stands over the head of the patient, and the patient sits on a stool.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	And then let blood from the vein with long and slight bloodletting little by little; and then take a certain amount of blood or, according to necessity, water; and then make it similar to the other vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And then remove the thread and tighten the two veins a little with constriction so that the patient does not faint, and let him lie down because the plague is healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	And the healing of bloodletting from the veins causes little blisters and pustules in the mouth and corruption of the gums and bad ulcers and cracks, and bad ulcers that are in the nose and in the orbit.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	And the quality of the bloodletting from them is that you face the patient toward you, and tighten his collar with a bandage, and then turn his lips on both sides and look at two veins, one on the right side of the lip and the other on the left; and the color of each is blacker than that of the other, and water is added because in the circuit of those are small black veins; and then cut either with a scalpel that does not shine.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	Then if you have doubt, leave them to be cut by the doctor who cuts the most; and from the manifest blister of those.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And make similar the two veins that are in the lips.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	Then cut more often to cut the two veins that are in the lip.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	May the healing of two veins that are on the tongue be bloodletting from the head to prevent choking which is in the throat, and to the leprosy of the uvula, and to the leprosy of the mouth.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And the quality of bloodletting from them is that you face the patient toward the sun, and raise his tongue, and look at it on both sides; and from one side of the tongue there is a vein, and from the other side another, and the color of each is turning blacker.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And then let blood from either; and be careful not to finish your hand in bloodletting them, for they are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And your veins that are bloodletting in the thigh are those from which all men are accustomed to bleeding, and the bloodletting of them is done according to two ways, or they tie it with a thread of a certain length; or they cut it with a knife, and if it bleeds, then this is its way:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	is that it is suitable for cutting and from those are special thin pieces and subtle according to the width of the veins and according to the constriction of them.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Shape of bloodletting with a thread:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	is that it is suitable for opening the concave veins that are full of blood, and to those that contain thick blood; but at those that are small do not open them.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	This is the shape of bloodletting with a knife:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	is of very small width and very subtle extremity, and is suitable for bloodletting from thin veins that contain subtle sour blood.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	May the healing of bloodletting from the basilic vein be that one of three veins: for it takes the blood from the leprosy that is on the cheek and the head, and from there to the chest and the belly.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	is that the bloodletting doctor, when he bleeds from that vein, should keep it and be careful in pricking the bloodletting with a knife, because if he mistakes and cuts it with a knife, there will be a flow of blood; so it is necessary to check that he does not bleed from it with a stabbing knife, before he has cut it with a sharp one.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	If the basilic does not appear by a clear sign, then you should let it bleed and move to the other one, or look for some hair; or bleed from the end of the arm, because that vein is obvious; and cut it with a knife, and then bleed it with a stabbing knife.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	If you want to bleed him from the arm, then, facing the constriction of the arm that touches the place where you know it is, and place your hand on it; and then turn the arm and cut the vein with a knife, and then bleed it with a stabbing knife. Be careful not to hit the artery.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	When you stretch, with a constriction of the arm that touches the place where you know it is, and then that constriction becomes an inflation in the place where you have stretched it on your hand; then that inflation is an inflation of the artery, and so it bursts.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	If the blood flows in bloodletting like a child's ear, and the blood is thin water, then you know that it is the blood of the artery; and then you stop the bleeding and pause the cut with a long piece; and then put pressure on the cut, and if the blood stops flowing, then you tighten the arm and leave it.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	Keep the patient away from moisture of any kind, and be careful of him and do not let him touch that place for a few days until it is healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	If the blood does not stop flowing and you are in a place where there is no medicine by water, then you cut the artery, if it appears to you; because the end of the vein is contracted, and the blood stops flowing; or that you take a piece of fistula, and break that one, and put the other one on, and tighten it with a thread and with a powder within two days.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And then if the blood has stopped flowing, then it is good; and if not, then treat that place with water from which it is reminded of the place of the powder that stops the flow of blood.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	is difficult because of the smallness of the place of leprosy and the possibility of breaking the arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	May the bleeding from the black vein be healing that it takes the blood from the crown of the head and leaves the body; because it is composed of veins of the basilic and veins of the head, as I have said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	is difficult for the bloodletting doctor because, if he mistakes and cuts it with a knife, there will be stupor in him; and then, if he fixes the cut in bloodletting with a knife and injures the nerve, it will cause him much pain, and it is difficult to heal him; and that nerve appears on the face when it is irritated; and if it is hidden from some people and is thin and does not show, then you should stop bleeding from it with a stabbing knife.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if the vein is between two nerves, then you should cut it in length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The advantage of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is that it attracts the blood from the head and prevents headaches from the hernias of the brain.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And in this particular case, if you want to take blood with phlebotomy from the olive or from the temporal vein; for it is the safest of all veins, since it does not leave the artery or the nerves.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	But nevertheless it is necessary that you take care with phlebotomy that you do not pierce the head of the lacert so much only, and search for the place more easily, and do not hit it if it is not struck with the first puncture that it is with phlebotomy a few drops.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	But nevertheless it is very painful in some people when phlebotomy is done at the first puncture, and not struck with it; but does not feel that apoplexy.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	The quality of phlebotomy of that and the accidents of it, in which you must consider in their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first of it is that you must know that phlebotomy is not administered unless in the conservation of health and for the hope of it, and that it is done in one of the veins that are in the neck, so is: cephalic, facial and basilic; and that it is done at the beginning of spring, at the start of autumn, and in winter just before the meal, when there appear signs of swelling.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And let phlebotomy be done and the third day or at the first moment that of the day passes three hours.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	But phlebotomy which is administered, may be done when it causes convenience and necessity or of night or day, in an hour and at all times.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And you must know that it is not phlebotomized until he has been twelve years old, and the woman is not phlebotomized unless she has passed seven years old, and the old ones are not phlebotomized who have already passed sixty years old.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And if anyone wants to be phlebotomized in some way, he must tell the doctor in advance about the hemorrhoids before phlebotomy with a knife, if there is a tear retained, so that the veins do not draw the excesses in the phlebotomy of the hemorrhoids, which are worthless, and do not affect the main members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And do not phlebotomize the patient who is sick with jaundice and diarrhea, nor those who are drunk or suffering from a fever, unless it is necessary, that is, because of the blood which has come out from him; nor those who have suffered from a hard labor, or from an exercise, or from a meal or from a vigil, or for any other reason that dissolves the strength, either of man or animal.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And consider in subtle way the humors before him if the blood is thick, at meals and drinks, and at medicines if it is possible to come to him.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And enter into the bath if any cause does not prohibit it, or exercise by some exercise so that the blood is subtleized.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And do phlebotomy from his feet at noon, so it is around the third hour, thus: when you have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And let the foot of that person be kept safe on that day from all animal accidents, thus: when there is anguish, anger, fear, and from all bodily accidents, thus: when work and unnecessary sorrow and trouble come.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And at the same time let the following things be considered in the use of those: for example, if there is a smell and odor, and balm and similar to them according to the quantity of possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And follow the phlebotomist on a cushion that is more comfortable, or that the cushion of that person who is to be phlebotomized.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And return his arms, and rub that with the hand of the phlebotomist twice or three times; and tighten the ligature with a strap and wrap that with two drops.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And let the constriction be tight, because the constriction that is not tightened or loosened, or is loosened too much, is prohibited from flowing blood; or it is softened, and the constriction of the blood is stopped.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And tighten it, that the one who is to be phlebotomized rubs his hands together between them before the veins are swollen, and are revealed in feeling.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And let the phlebotomist rub the hands of the patient with a little olive oil in particular; and let him place his hand on the left side of that vein, leaving the spot from which he wants to do the phlebotomy so that the vein runs a little, and the puncture is stopped because the veins are full of blood and when the phlebotomist stops puncturing on that one, it is discovered; and the phlebotomist does not open the vein, and if he opens it, that vein is constricted.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And therefore, through all these things, let the phlebotomist be careful and attentive in all these causes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And do not stop the phlebotomy, but if the vein is found in a droplet, then it is done; and if not, you will come to another droplet from that place a little, or on the right side of the head, if the place is constricted.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the place is constricted, or the patient fears it, then let him rest for a day or two, and do not tighten the ligature, because it will draw out blood profusely, and do not go into the bath.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And repeat the phlebotomy if it is necessary.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the vision is small and the blood comes out subtly, and you fear that it will not get the amount you want, then you will repeat the phlebotomy in the same place a second time and adjust in the vision a little, and do it at the meal before the place is constricted, because the place is constricted in some people when it is done a little.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	But if that person is constricted already, then do not repeat the phlebotomy there, because it does not excuse you any cause; and stop over that part of the oil droplet, because it pleases the blood vessels.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And it is better in this place than oil and other oils.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	And administer oil droplet in all phlebotomy, that the veins which are to be phlebotomized are prohibited from constricting the blood, and do not open it with a sharp knife when you stop puncturing on one of them; for the blood comes out subtly and is rolled when it is thick.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if in the place of phlebotomy a great apoplexy is produced, because drops of blood appear, and more so in that person who does not stop bleeding but that droplet, or in the vision of the vein, then you will fain, and stop over the spot with a sponge infused with salt and water, slightly heated, and tighten it for an hour; for it is dissolved.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And let the water come to the patient from that vein with a complement of him or from another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if it remains in the place for a few days any black or green color, then you will not see it; and if you want, stop over that cause of aloe and mirra dissolved, or any other cause of mint juice or bitter plant or similar to them.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	And apoplexies and hemorrhages will occur in those veins which are to be phlebotomized from the temporal.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	E donc pause your hand over that one, and if you feel softness under it, then put your pressure on that eminence, for that is a bad thing; and so guard yourself that you should not place your pressure on that any cause of what I have said, for there will flow much blood from the artery.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And make an ointment with it that is stiffened, so that the place is hardened and then cure this one with other treatment until it is healed.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And when you extract the blood from him to everyone according to the quantity of its virtue and according to the victorious color over the blood, let it appear.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	For if the blood is black, then let you leave it to be extracted until it is thinned; and roughly if you turn it thick, then let you leave it to be extracted until it is thinned; and roughly if it is hot, then leave it to be extracted until its sharpness is reduced.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And when that one is full and strong and has a need of extracting blood in a single vein, then the phlebotomy of the vein should be increased and the phlebotomy should flow.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And when that one is freewheeling, then do the opposite of that one; and when you extract that blood in several veins, and the vein should be tight.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	And the best that is administered in phlebotomy of a vein is that it is the transverse section, not puncturing.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	And this way of phlebotomy is saved from the flow of blood and from the incision of nerves; and it is more admirable and more saved than phlebotomy according to its height and length.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And when that one is accustomed to arrive at fainting, then do phlebotomy, and if you cure this one beforehand the phlebotomy with a little bread infused with wine or simple oxymel cut; and extract from him the blood in three veins or four.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if it is a feverish condition of the body, then do phlebotomy beforehand with infused wine or perfumed milk with spices like this one with pepper, cinnamon, ginger and others, or perfumed milk and an aromatic and fragrant thing.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if it happens to arrive at fainting, then do phlebotomy, and it is a cause of its loss of blood, then let you drink water with milk and perfumed wine; and use aromatic things like this one, and limit your hand on that one.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use of the other causes that we have said in the division in the chapter about fainting by evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And who wants to throw off his arms and dissolve his blood according to the second vein, then do phlebotomy by means of a motion evacuation, and its virtue is fickle, throwing away little blood little by little, so it is according to the quantity of the virtue in consecutive days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	May who wants to throw off his arms and remove his blood according to the second vein, and his body is strong, then make water before seven or nine hours from the first phlebotomy.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	May who wants to throw away the blood of his body in the opposite way of the departure at which it declines, then do so on the second or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	May that body in which the blood is already hot and acute and causes fever, then do phlebotomy on it in a single vein and extract a large quantity of it, and increase the vision until it happens to fainting, for if you keep your hand over its pulse, you will not cause death instead of fainting, since the veins will give blood away from that one, rather than from the heart.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And do not when you want to release the arm and evacuate the blood according to the second vein, although it is closed the orifice of the vein and is difficult to extract the blood, then press firmly on it with a certain movement and extend it slightly, for this blood is too bad.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	While you are leaving it, so that it is extracted again; or remain there on the acuteness of the phlebotomy that is coagulated blood in the orifice of the vein; or place a handful of tar tripe or rosehip on it and put pressure lightly on it until the blood comes out.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein is detached, then leave that one and do not touch it until the abscess is quiet.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if necessity forces you to evacuate the blood according to the second vein, and it is not an excuse, then do so on that one place or in another arm in a different vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the vein called "bracelet of the arm" is phlebotomized in place of the forearm or biceps, because it is not contracted or contorted, since it is composed of those.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	And the quality of phlebotomy is that the patient puts his hand in cold water until the vein swells and the vein appears clearly.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	Then make it strong on that one with a certain ligament half-tight; and phlebotomy according to the transverse little, not longitudinally or according to its length.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And be the vision broad and your phlebotomy is with it that you extract it on that one at the joint of the hand a little bit.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if it is prohibited for the blood to flow, then you will have to repeat your hand in cold water and let the blood run into the water until you achieve your need.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	May who is in the summer days, then you are forgiven for repeating your hand in cold water, and the body's pause is placed on cold water in winter time.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And this vein's phlebotomy is more saved than that of any other veins, since it does not have a pulsating vein or nerves.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And the phlebotomy of the right arm's wrist is referred to the blood vessels on the palm of the hand.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of phlebotomy is that you tighten your hand with a certain ligament or with your own, since you put it in cold water, until the vein swells and is clearly visible; and then do phlebotomy on that transverse one; and if you incise that one from all over, then we will not see it anywhere.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And preserve your hand from the phlebotomy, since it only has the nerves of the bare skin.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	Then repeat your hand in cold water and let the blood run into that one, since if you do not repeat that one in cold water, the blood will coagulate in the vein's orifice, which is prohibited for flow.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And when the blood is extracted according to the quantity of necessity, then you stop over the vein with oil and salt, so that it is not solidified firmly; and roughly, if you make a cut all in one go.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	May who wants to improve the phlebotomy of that one on the left hand, is that it is referred to the blood vessels on one's own body.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And do likewise in phlebotomy of this one with milk as you have done in the other.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And the benefit of the phlebotomy is to the blood vessels that are in the departure of the body, as well as the benefits of milk, and the holding of menstruation, and the benefits of the palms and ulcers of the skin and ancient veins, and their resemblance to the benefits.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	And the quality of phlebotomy is that the patient puts his neck in cold water and rubs it on that one until the veins appear; and place it over the joint of the neck with a certain bandage; and the location of the vein is clearly visible, and from that one branches are made on the face of the neck.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And so he will make a wide loop with the rope or let the loop hang down from the neck of the animal, because it is better and more effective this way, since it gives him more freedom to move.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if he cuts it on the foot's face, then you must be careful not to cut the nerves that run through it, and pause your cutting at this place, as if you were going to cut it in half.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	Then let his feet rest.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	But if the patient's foot must be raised, then you will repeat the operation on his foot in water and let the fluid run off in that place where it has been evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the cutter has made a mistake in the first cut, then repeat the cutting on it a little bit, because the place is small; and don't worry about hurting him, but be careful not to cut the nerves as we have said before.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And apparently you will wrap the other foot around it.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And from the sciatic vein, the place where we have spoken before must be left hanging from the side of the leg where the patient's hernia is.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And the stretching of his feet during the cutting of him is done at the hip when it is cut from the tail.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the quality of the cutting of him is that the patient goes into water, and quickly and strongly stretch his foot from the neck of the hernia with four thin pieces of rope, because you can't see it unless it's wet.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And so when it appears, then you will cut it with the second cut that is possible and second in length, and it is better; or you will cut it with a cutting or you will break it with a breaking, because the place is small.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And this is a small animal that walks on its toes; and if you notice it, and it doesn't appear clearly to the touch, then cut one of its legs, and it is that which appears at the back of the foot instead of the little finger and the middle finger.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And be careful not to cut the nerves, and let the fluid run off in the amount you want.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	Then return it to its tightness and place it over the site of the cutting with a little pressure, because it will heal well.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Of wind and of the qualities of using those.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	For wind and for corns, or for earache, or for vertigo.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	And there are two ways to treat wind: one is by cutting and removing the fluid, and another is by massaging and stimulating it.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this type of wind treatment, which is done by massage, has two ways: either it' s hot or it' s cold.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And for wind treatments that are done by cutting and removing the fluid there are twelve places on the body, of which the last is behind the head, and the first is at the tip of the skull; and another in front of the jaw, leaving it between the teeth; and another above the brow bone; and another in the middle of the forehead; and another in the lower part of the eye; and another on the outer corner of the eye; and another on the inner corner of the eye; and another on the ear; and two at the neck.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	And wind treatment doesn' t come from large veins in the flesh, and it isn' t effective for this type of wind that comes from an empty place inside the body, but only from a small vessel; nor does it come from fire or cold that is done to a disease by filling it up.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	But if necessity demands wind treatment for illness or constant pain, then give it at the beginning of the meal and at its end; and in the middle of it as well.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	And this is the cause because men suffer from wind that multiplies inside them, so as not to get rid of it by wind treatment and it causes weight and suddenness in their heads and in their skulls; and in those who suffer from wind in front of their faces, and darkness and dullness in their eyes; and from those who shed the place of their wind; and from those whose tongue is sticking out and they spit wind; and from those who are sleeping a lot, and those who wake up at night because of wind, and from others similar to them.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	So if it happens in any of these causes, especially if it is at the third or sixth hour of the day, then order wind treatment to be done rather than wait for a few more hours.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And good wind treatment for the neck is that when it raises the weight on the head and it falls into the throat; but be careful not to evacuate the whole body with it.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this type of wind treatment is in the place of cutting the head.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it' not useful for using water that is used for scrubbing, or that is used for catarrh, because it causes a great problem.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And with that water it isn' t useful for treating the old diseases, and in the skulls where there are chronic pains.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	But to those who are treated with wind treatment that is continuous on them, they become forgetful; and with water it is harmful for this purpose.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	But wind treatment with alcohol is done in the place of cutting the blood vessel and the throat; and with it you give breath, and constriction to the throat, and splitting the instrument of breathing, and coughing, and swelling.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And with a little bit of alcohol in the wind treatment, because if it is stopped halfway, it weakens the body and the stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And with wind treatment with alcohol, you give relief to headaches and eye pain, and to migraine, and to feverishness, and to pains in the teeth; and it is done in the place of cutting the throat.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And be careful that the wind treatment doesn' t press too hard so as not to cut the artery and cause a rush of blood.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And wind treatment that is given to the jaw gives alcohol in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and similar diseases to those that are in the mouth, and they are done by cutting the other way instead of this way.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	But wind treatment that is done on the two spatulas causes hair loss, which is caused by heat.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And wind treatment that is done on the inside of the two brasses gives you life by cutting three small veins, for one is in the base of the skull, another is in the forehead, and another is in the neck; because those small vessels are more effective than the large ones within the body, so the blood flows to them.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And order the wind treatment not to cut it in the form of cutting, because the place is exposed; and leave it away from its nerves and arteries.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And this type of wind treatment is done on the feet and it gives you hemorrhoids in the anus, and ulcers.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And order the wind treatment to be powerful, and that it' s done by earache, because the place is small for a strong cutting; and do not make it too gentle with the cutting.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	But small wind treatment by a small movement, because it makes the blood run throughout the body, and causes old pains in the chest and in the mother, and in the bladder; and it causes menstruation, and gives pain to both breasts and to the udder; and it is done by cutting two toes, and cutting two nails, and cutting two cavities.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	However, they do not heal the whole body and cause fainting in men.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And from the wind, when it is strong, a breath of two blankets is sufficient for cooling.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	And the quality of the position of the winds is that you pause the wind at the beginning to see and suck up wetness quickly, and do not prolong the position of the winds, but rather pause it gently, and hold it carefully, and let the humors come to the place by arrival slowly.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not repeat this water and continue inside until you see the place turn red and swell and the pain of the saint appear.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	Then scrub and repeat the liquid little by little, and carefully consider the disposition of the bodies.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	Whose meat is rotten from within, cover it so that you scrub it once and do not push it further, so that the place is not ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And order the wind to amplify the scrubbing and make it a little less, and easily carry away the liquid.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if the saint is thick, then cover it so that you scrub two times, because in the first scrubbing the way of subtilization to the saint and the liquid of him is opened.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	But in the second for the acquired scrutinization of the gross extraction of the saint.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the saint is very foul, then make scrubbing in the third time so that it achieves the last.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	Finally, when we want to extract a little or a bit of the saint, one scrubbing is enough for us.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we want to extract one saint, make a deep scrubbing; and if we know that the saint is thick, then cover it with a thick scrubbing.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the term of scrubbing in which the depth of the wound is only one.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if that from which the wound is thick, hard, rough, and the pores of it are tight, open, and resolute; if it is in summer, then oil of aloe or oil of violet, or oil of amaryllis, or oil of chamomile; and if it is in winter, then oil of thyme, or oil of St. John's wort, and such like.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the superfluity is thick and frizzly, then make the oil be sweet-smelling, or oil of myrrh, or oil of aloe, or oil of anise, and such like.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	But if the wind-machine has wide pores and is prone to oil, then cover those places of the wind-machine with its own oil, and make the wind blow with a thin water of vinegar, or with water of chamomile, or with water of thyme; and similar things to those.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And if that from which the saint is of a moist humidity, clean your wind-machine with a thin water of honey, or with water of mulberry and sumach; and similar things to those.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And if the superfluities are thick, then clean your wind-machine with a strong water of mint, or with water of fennel, which is marjoram, or with a decoction of anise, or chamomile; and similar things to those.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And that the wind is kept before a bath; and let it be administered close to the moment of the bath for an hour or two, and let him sleep next to the wind.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What is needed so that the person who is being wound-up is held by a phlebotomist before wound-up?
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	And consider at the beginning: then if the wind-machine or that which is to be bled is coleric and blows on the blood and inflammation, then take things that cool, such as milk of roses, and water of fennel and lettuce, and secanbin, and julep, and similar things.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And pause their feedings such as porridge, and meat of fowl birds, and prepared foods with flavor, and similar things to those.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And if that from which the complex is frizzly, then take in drinking sweet syrup, or syrup of licorice with seeds, and sumac, and a little odorant between vinegar and salt; and let it be forbidden to drink much, and pause his feedings of porridge and cannabis and ales, and peters, and pet birds.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And that on the day of wind-up and bleeding the water is greater than the food.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And that is given in water to some men of bitter-almond syrup, or medicine of musk, which is musk, before wind-up or bleeding, or close to it, so that the main members are comfortable and the saint is subtilized; and do not take those cuts.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	And the winds that have only one scrubbing are paused over their heads, and on their feet and toes, and on the navel, because those members do not suffer scrubbing on themselves.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And it is not desired in those but a attraction of the saint from a member, such as if wind pauses over a breast in malacia of the flow of the saint from the saint's navel; and use that for which the member becomes dissolved and softens it, and puts it off to one side and keeps away from it, because it resolves the wind.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And already is paused over the cheeks when it happens in their falling or rain, because of the virtue of a strong attraction that brings up the falling and eliminates the rain from its place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And it seems like when it is paused over the breast and navel, therefore a wind-up happens in those enclosed.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	And these winds are given with water only; and some are given with milk.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And some are given full of cold water in the malacia of the navel.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And water is for the wind to be filled and be large, it is only cold water or water in which herbs are cut for water.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Form of wind-up given with fire: let the width of the orifice be two fingers wide, second that we have formed it; and the quantity of the water is half a palm; and be in the middle of it, in the place that is in the circuit, most of it, the needle is small according to the quantity that enters it.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	Let it be made of a little salt and citrus, of large edges, lion, hernia, and third for that the member does not keep its position over it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And be at the middle of it a transverse bar of iron or salt, where it is paused with fire.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And already is this great wind-up from that which we have spoken of; and the little less from that, according to the malacities and the state of that which uses it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the winds of the sick and exhausted are other than the winds of young people and large bodies.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the quality of pausing this wind with fire on the member is that it extend the bar of iron a little before a small candle of wax, and pause that one over the middle of the transverse bar in the place of the wind-up, so that the fire does not burn the body of the patient.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And then pause it over the member of the patient, and place the needle that we have said, before which we do not hold the wind-up, and keep the fire burning above that needle, then let the wind-up be dissolved.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And you light the fire according to their way, and return to that if they are not satisfied with this.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	May it be given in a vessel of clay for washing, not made with a transverse rim or handle, but to be filled with water, and placed on the limb only.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is the form of it: And this vessel is the better, the larger it is, so that it can receive a great amount of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Chapter .xciii.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Sanguineous substances are not administered in full limbs but in the limbs where it is not possible to place vessels, because of their smallness, so that they can be applied with the nose and the tongue; or on a naked limb, when applied with the nose and mouth, or else.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those that you have found to be bloody ones that are in water full of mud.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And let them be laid down for the day and night in water full of mud until they are no longer hungry, so that it does not cause any trouble in the patient's stomach; and then let them be evacuated with a flood of blood and with vessels; and then rub the limb with the hand until it turns red; and then let them be placed.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are filled up, and case.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if it is possible to draw off the liquid from the place with a vessel, it is better to do so after dinner.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	But if not, then wash the place with vinegar and immediately pour on water; and let it be rubbed and squeezed.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the patient's condition persists for a long time, and the blood remains, then put a cloth over it in boiling water, and place that on it until the residue is removed.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the sickness persists, then sprinkle over it vitriol trissulated, or yolks of eggs and their yolks as they are for stinging causes, until the sickness is gone; or let them be placed on the place beans boiled in water, and let them be laid down until the beans stick to the place, and the sickness is gone.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And finally, if necessary, a second application of blood-suckers, when it is possible to change those.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if blood-suckers are prohibited by suspension, then rub the place with fresh blood or place an awl in the places until the sickness comes; and then let them be placed, for those when they feel any sickness will come immediately.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want to make them drop down, sprinkle over them a little of allspice trissulated, or salt, or ash, and sometimes often.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Thus begins the treatment for the third time: for restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is necessary in the art of medicine; and it is for restoring a fracture and an accidental dislocation in the bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Now, son you aware that the foolish doctors and the common practitioners and those who at any time have not regarded the free ones of the Ancient ones or read a letter from them?
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason the method of the wise ones has been forbidden on our land; and I have not forgotten it at all in any time through all the books of the Ancient ones and my study on their understanding, until I drew out science from them.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And then I began to do experiments and studies in the length of my life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have already described in this chapter all that relates to my science and on which the greatest experiment was made; for it is appropriate that this should be renewed by you and taken away from the occupation of elaborating; and it is also a renewal for me at the end of elaborating; and it has shown me in the end of declaration; and I have formed it out of the form of the instruments that are administered in this, through the addition of declaration, just as I have done in two preceding chapters.
Capitol primier.	Chapter one.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	First of all, let us discuss the different types of fractures of bones, for which a necessary premise exists before we begin to reminisce about the members that have been broken and are different in each one.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	And let us therefore say in the proem of this chapter the sum of the speech; and the chapters for understanding those, at the beginning, will certainly be the artisans and stand on the veracity of those; so it is you and those who are eager to learn or study this noble art from others.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And let me say that when a fracture or dislocation or twisting or displacement occurs, then I will go at the beginning to bloodletting or poulticing that person, or any time, if you do not prohibit any cause, as with the healing of virtue, or that to which it has happened, or old age, or time of intense heat, or intense cold.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And then let it be put in a diet of fresh herbs and meat of geese and crayfish; and prohibit meat that is fatty and fill it with a diet that fills the veins with blood, unless you are certain that an apoplexy will come; and if you do not fear emission of material into the limb.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And then return the patient to his regular regime first, by which he usually walks.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And let the broken bone begin to be restored, then I will say that the patient is fed with nutritious foods of flour mixed with water, and raw, and beans, and peas, and chickens, and fish, and sweet, and thick, and similar to those; and it is in this diet that coagulations of fractures are made gently and easily.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And know that the bones break in those who are in their early years and in their decrepitude, it is not possible that they will continue to be sustained and will be consolidated according to their nature by the drying up of the limbs.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they are consolidated and continued according to their nature at all times by the drying up of those limbs, and they are consolidated and continued in the end of leniity, as with the bones of small children.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	However, nature adjusts and adheres to the broken bone throughout the whole story in any cause that is similar to a glut in which there is thickness that clings and strengthens it within itself until it comes to an end of strength and firmness, just as fire at the beginning, unless there is a cause that prohibits this from its works.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason it is necessary to pause the meals of the patient, in meals where there is thickness and viscosity and richness, as I have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	A variety of fractures according to a variety of limbs.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And know that the types of fractures are different according to the variety of limbs, for a fracture in the bone of the neck is different from a fracture in the bone of the head; and a fracture in the foot bone is different from a fracture in the leg bone; and resembling, all the other limbs are different from each other.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And I have already described the entire species of fractures, separated in a separate chapter from the other.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	A variety of fractures within themselves.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And the types of fractures in their bones are different; for an arco-shaped fracture occurs in the stars; and some are broken according to the length of the bone: and those are broken with pain and dislocation at the head, and a small fracture occurs.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And to all species is added a punishment or torment in the restoration of them according to that which will come; remember the distinction of them in their places.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	This is a diagnosis of a broken bone.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And this is the description of a broken bone: it is a twisted shape, and from that prominence and appearance, and from it when you press it with your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And so when it is not in the twisted place that appears nor below is made any movement with the touch and the patient does not suffer great pain, then there is no fracture here.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	While it is possible that it is a twist or a small crack, then do not move your hand around and press down on it with your hand so that you can feel it, and at the same time, pause for a moment; then, if necessary, make it tighter with a thin string.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And you know that the place where it is arched and does not split into two or another part, then that does not cause a sudden change; when it has been completely straightened out from its curve, then begin to correct it little by little, so that with a sudden change, a puss forms on it.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if, with the sudden change, a puss forms on it, then let that be for several days until the pus stops; and at the same time, remove it in any way you can by levitation or engineering.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And know that the restoration of its shape and the tightening of it is lighter than the bone where such a sudden change occurs.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	Then strengthen that second one that will come when you remember it.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	And if in the bone there are two parts separated from each other, then it is necessary to remove this damaged limb entirely, if it is the arm or the leg; or with two strings or one string and the hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And place it in the position where you pause the limb that is bent according to its natural shape, while the parts that are separated from the bent limb are extended, then know that you should pierce those parts with a needle and thread them together in any way you can.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And be careful that, with your operation or injury, nothing happens to the patient's back; and pierce yourself in accordance with your power that you apply one bone to another in any of its shapes.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	Then, when you can take advantage of touching your hand, and if there is no other cause, correct it and close it up with the quantity of your skill.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And cause a violent extension and compression to occur, so that with it, certain metzes that are seen to cause the pus to form on the bone because of its operation, or that cause a contraction in the limb when they see water for the operation of their metzes.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	Then connect it with the other bone and perform a strict operation on that limb, rest and tranquility; keep the patient under surveillance during his wakefulness and sleep, and observe his movement and elimination, and use all of your skills to do so; and wait until that position of the limb is right for you so that you don't feel pain in that position; then, if it does not feel pain, change its position from that one with the right one, so that no twist occurs when it is restored.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of the tightening of the limb is that which I recommend to you; so that you know that bent limbs are varied in their smallness and their size and the shape of those.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And for those that are small, such as the arm and the leg, so that their wrapping is made of a very thin cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	And for those that are large, such as the thigh or chest, so that in those there is a wrapping of both sides and it is tightly bound together, so that when it is not wrapped properly, it can become distorted; and if there is a gap between the wrapping and the limb, then it will cause an injury.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	Then begin to correct it, and take care with your hand when you do so, so that the fracture is in the middle of those three wrappings or four, according to how much the limb needs; and strengthen your hand a little on the limb.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	Then pause at the top of the place where the fracture is, and tighten your hand that doesn'y slip; then strengthen the place where you have tightened it.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	Then stretch that limb out slightly with the wrapping at the fracture's place, and make the tightening lighter little by little until you feel a strong part of it.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	Then take another object and wrap it around that bent part with the wrapping, and pause at the top of the place where the fracture is; then make the first wrapping lighter on the limb; and perform your operation on the tightening of the second wrapping.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	Then pause between the wrappings with a piece of cloth or leather so that the twist in the fracture is corrected if there is any; and if not, do not stop for any reason.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	Then pause on another object, and stretch those wrappings over it with care so that they do not tear, if there is no swelling or pus at the fracture, then pause on water to ease the swelling; and let those be for a few days; and then tighten your hand on them.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And let the length of each strap be different from each other, and form it well; or let it be made of bamboo, or of palm branches; and make the width of each strap according to this shape and figure:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, know that the strap placed over that fracture is thicker and wider a little than the other straps, and let the length of the strap according to how long it needs to be in order to reach the limb's magnitude and smallness; then tighten your hand on those straps with another object, as I have described for tightening; and make this tight so that it does not slip; and if necessary, add a piece of cloth or leather over it to keep it in place.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And know that the strings should be of average thickness and soft; and if they are thick, as I have seen through the operation of some foolish metzes where they were paused with those same strings of leather, it is a great mistake, since it catches the string in place and tears it; and if they are too thin, then their knot will not be secure.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And fine strings are not convenient either, because you will not be able to tighten them with those; and if there is a gap between one strap and another, then there will be half a string.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient is held between the extremities of the straps and their tightening in those places, then pause a little further away from that piece of leather or rope with which you are holding him so that it doesn'y cause him any injury.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	And some fractures are due to bad luck, and the dislocation occurs in the joint, and I have a memory of that one in the Capitol according to its uniqueness.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And know that any damaged limb is not right to be stretched with the straps on the first day; and this cause is because the limb, when it is large, does not stop pausing over the straps until three or seven days have passed, according to your security of the coming pus.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	And this is the way of those who have been injured by impact and dislocation and twisting.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	And a way of embowelling that is like a shower of restoration from a fracture, and more complicated for the females and children, because it is water that comes out over which no heat is felt nor dust; and this is because you take flour powder, and this is the flour's medulla that runs in the mill when the millstone moves in the mill's parts.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And let it be cooked like that, unless you want to chop it finely with a knife, and do not make the mixture too thin or too dense; and use it quickly.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Other way of applying plaster to restore fracture and dislocation and twists: Take assafetida, myrrh, acacia, fennel, and anise, which is called Salvage, all within one dragon; myrrh and aloes within five dragons; alochile within six dragons; all are boiled and ground with water of milk or white of egg if the patient's composition is scorched; and then use this plaster, because it is of good composition and restores broken bones slightly, and gives life to a hundred men.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another way of applying plaster to cure fracture and twists: Take a handful of white rose within one dragon; myrrh and aloes within five dragons; acacia within six dragons; and armecene within xx dragons.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All of these three things are to be finely chopped in a mortar, and mixed with water or garlic juice, and used.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	A way of treating joint and bone pain due to different causes, such as injuries and fractures: take sheep's wool, immerse it in wine and oil, and place it on the affected area.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	May be this ointment does not have the power of healing, to stop a cold sweat, and to drive away pains properly.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another way of treating broken bones: take leaves of the fig tree and leaves of the poppy, and grind them together to make an ointment. Apply it as needed.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida .i.; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	A way of preparing a fresh ointment to restore broken bones and to drive away a cold sweat: take roots of alfalfa, of chamomile and violets, of barley flour, and of all the rest. Grind them together with water; then add honey and butter. All of these three things are to be finely chopped in a mortar if the member is not bleeding.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	If it is bleeding, then cook it with water from coriander or use the same water.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another way of treating a persistent cold sweat, when it occurs, is to make an ointment with roots of alfalfa and senf, and marjoram, violets, chamomile, and all the rest; all of these things are finely chopped in a mortar with water from sage or double water or wine, depending on the member's condition and the amount of rest required.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	May be Ypocras does not cause any harm when applied to a broken limb, but rather does good if it is made of wax and oil, and not for any other reason; and remember that it must be fine in consistency, neither too thin nor too dense.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	May be Gualia is fine that it is applied to the broken limb does good to restore it and causes in which there is dryness with small amount of quality so as garlic, onions and resembling those causes that we have recommended.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	A way of treating injuries and pain: take milk, dried dates, hair of a man (shaved), and althaa, and salt, all ground together in a mortar; grind them finely, and make an ointment.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	May be the quantity depends on the pain and the amount of rest required; if there is no pain or trouble caused by the injury, and the bone is not broken or it hurts in its place, then you do not need to apply this ointment.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if there is pain or trouble at the site, intense pain or swelling, then you cover it with a cloth or bandage, and apply this ointment after that.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	And take a cloth of linen and sea sponge, wet with water, and dip the cloth in wine, and place it on the affected area until the swelling and pain stop; then let the member rest for an hour; then apply a fresh cloth dipped in wine and oil or rose oil, and place it on top for an hour; then check for any evidence of cold sweat, and let the member rest.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then repeat that process gently and frequently, and apply this ointment with small amount to the affected area until it is healed.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if the cold sweat, pain and swelling, and all these accidents have already been treated with this ointment and you do not feel any relief from it, then repeat applying it frequently until you feel relief.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o .vii.; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if there is no cause for those injuries that I have mentioned; then do not apply this ointment unless three days or four or five or seven have passed. and some are left for 20 days according to what we have said, until the fracture heals, and if there is no pain or trouble; then place a cloth dipped in vinegar on top of it.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	Then adjust the pressure more than in your first attempt, and adjust it according to the thickening of the patient' water; since the memory of it follows.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	May be if the site of the fracture is drying out and becoming thinner more than what it should, then know that nutrition will not reach it; and therefore, dip it in water to restore it completely; and do so for three days; and ease a little pressure on it; and through this process, the member receives nutrition, and heals gently.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	May be if the site of the fracture is restored completely by what we have mentioned above, and it is not restored at first attempt, according to what covers it; and restore it according to its tortuosity, as an error in their operation, and a great fear, and if it is a dry bone, then it grows larger in its free area, and turns around with water.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	I have not seen anything about this, so it is more reasonable to believe that it does not.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Capitol according to what we have mentioned above: Of the fracture when it occurs at the top of the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The fractures are diverse, and the causes are different, since one fracture can be caused by a blow from a stone, and another can be caused by the stone hitting the bone inside the box, which breaks the bone, or by a blow that does not hit the bone but hits the flesh behind it; and this type of fracture is called a total dislocation.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the pain of these two fractures is great or slight, and the fracture causes contraction or extension; and its cause is a blow from rain or hitting the ground while standing.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture is penetrative, which means it passes through the skin of the pannicum; or it occurs on the face of the bone, and the pain of these two fractures is great or slight.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And one fracture is that it is absorbed by the bone, in the subtlety of the hair of the finger, and through this process, this type of fracture is called capillary.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And this is a fracture that occurs from hitting the ground or from a blow, and it looks like it; which makes a part of the bone break into its hollow space, and break at the base of the finger bones.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	And most often it is done on the bones of the skeleton, as well as when they are covered with flesh.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And in all these species of fractures it is necessary to put them together, and in doing so the bones must be separated.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	Then I was filled with horror at all this in its place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And so I examine all these kinds of fractures by touch, and by inspection and by the smell of rotten flesh that is on them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And the special kind of bone that is known by this, which is discovered on the bone, and is washed, and is dried out, for the fracture looks black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	But in the treatment of fractures consider the beginning of the patient's illness, and if you see by clear evidence that it means pain, such as vomiting with cholera, ekstasis, loss of reason, delirium, and fainting, high fever, and the appearance of blisters on them, and similar symptoms to those of the major disorders, then do not treat them as if they were cured.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if you hope for a cure from non-curable illnesses, then begin the patient's treatment.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	The cause is because if it has come to you with the plague in its beginning and it has come on the fourth day of winter, then know that you should study the treatment of the bone before the twelfth day according to all the dispositions.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is in the summer days, then know that you should treat the bone before the seventh day, because after that the bone has been corrupted by putrefaction, and those symptoms happen that have been recommended.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already reached the neck of the bone, and is very small and broken, then know that you should cut it off according to what I have recommended to you.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And know that if the patient's head is infected, and you discover on the bone according to custom and the way I have described it, and it is light on the head, then treat it.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if it happens to you that the bone is discovered, fluxes of blood or pus come out by cautery, then pause and wait for the pus to dry up, and make sure that the flux of blood stops; and then begin to treat the bone and to remove it.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	Then it is according to one of two ways of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the first way is that you cut the bone with a sharp knife, and this is how it is done: And then apply another knife to it, a little sharper than that one; and this is how it is done:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	Then apply the second knife, which is even sharper.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	Then you need to name various knives, some of which are sharper than others; and some of them are thinner than others, and of sharp-edged metal.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use them with ease in striking the knife to avoid hurting yourself.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is strong and hard, then know that you should pierce it before administrating the knives, naming them not deep knives.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And they are not named in the same way because those do not stop the term of the bone's end at water that is next to it, for its round edge or margin over it prevents it from being submerged and passing into the bone's substance.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	And it is convenient that you take many of these knives, each for a different bone's substance, within which the end of the head bone is acute, and its length and brevity are according to the amount of its substance.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	And this is the form of three kinds of knives: The quality of piercing in the bone's circuit is that you place the knife on the bone and turn it with the pins, within which you know that the bone has already been penetrated; then move the knife to another location, and pause at that point where all the thickness of the edge or around it.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	Then cut with the knife between any part of the bone and make it very small so that you can lift it up by levitation, as we have said, within which you remove the bone, or with your hand, or with some other instrument that you will prepare for water, also with tweezers and forceps that are small.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And know that you keep the knife away from any cause of the patient' cause.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And then, when you have finished circumcising the bone, separate it from the body if it continues to hang; then extract it, knowing that you place it in the roughness of the water where it is on the bone and another instrument that resembles a knife, but much sharper and smaller than the others.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if any part of the small bones remains, then do so easily with water that you have from the instruments; and then clean it thoroughly with lilac and wash those that we have recommended.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the other way of operation is light, far from fear, which says: It is necessary for you at first to begin to discover the part of the bone where the most violent and clear fracture has occurred, within which, when you have discovered that part, you will pause on it with a very sharp knife that is not too thick, and this is how it is done:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And that the sharp part is on both sides before it in length, and sometimes also in width, and that the sharp part be fitted to the body by turning the sharp edge of the knife towards the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	Then hit the knife with a light blow on one side of a small part until it is completely cut through all the bone, and if you are sure that there is no blood coming out from it in any way, and if it was a man, then certainly, and if it was a woman, then probably.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	And if it happens to you that there is no part of the bone in contact with the body where the fracture occurs, then cut that part with a sharp knife, and release this one with ease, for it is released from the body without injury or fear.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the body, and that which has been cut off or is left on the bone is the edge of it, and it remains in its sharp and thin parts, then know that you should remove those edges and sharp parts with a very small knife, according to what you have prepared the number, of different quantities for you to be able to administer those in any location convenient for you.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And know that you administer to yourself the most sharp of these knives at the beginning of the operation, and then use the smallest of them, and do not stop until you have reached the point where it is necessary to administrate the most small and the most sharp of all.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	Then for any of the small fractures of hair or fine bone fractures, know that you treat it according to what you have discovered in its location.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And this is because it is not done equally with all those who have studied in that field.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And he writes to us, showing in great detail the fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the pannicol is rectangular when you extract the bone, then know that you take a cloth according to the amount of the plague, and submerge it in rose water, and pause it over the opening of the plague; then take another folded or triple cloth, and submerge it in rose water, and pause it over the first one, and make it very small on it as much as possible without hurting the body; and then administer on it a thin cloth, and do not tighten it except by the amount of the plague only.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And leave him alone on this treatment for a day or two until you are sure of the apoplexy; and then, after that, administer to him medicines which do not lack salt, as well as rusk and flour, and the dust of almonds and aristolochia, and similar things.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And if you make of these medicines a powder, which is powdered over the skin, when it is dry; and in general, administer to him all medicine of its properties that he should not drink or chew it.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And you should guard carefully that the plague in your treatment is pure; and it is not in a paste of ointment or any other; nor do you add virulence to it; because when it is applied to the skin of the brain, it corrupts and destroys it, and comes to the patient's throat, and there is evil and malice.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And it happens in the top of the head, when it is thoroughly washed and more so when the treatment is removed from him, and its surface is blacker; then consider afterwards whether it is that the patient has those accidents which we have said, you will know that it is dangerous altogether.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas .iii., e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is not black only because of the medicine that is applied to it, and if that blackness comes from the virtue of that medicine; then you should know that you take honey with some rose water. iii. and you put a cloth on them, and then place it over the top; and then treat them with the medicine which is suitable for them until they are cured.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter. iii.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	Of restoring a broken nose.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	You should know that the nose is not broken except by two bones put together, or one of those cartilage pieces, because both bones are there; for the piece which is broken is cartilaginous, and it is not broken but becomes sharp and twisted and ugly.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	Maybe if one of the two pieces is broken, then you should know that you introduce the little finger into the nose, and fit that fracture from within with the little bone, and push it outside; so that the nose returns to its natural shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	Do it easily for you, and know that you do not hurt those patients with your operation on their throats.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose, and it does not come to that, then make it equal with the end of the bone where there is a small thickness.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in two pieces, then you should make the appearance of that one.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And take care of it in the restoration of it on the first day of the fracture if possible; and otherwise, then let the seventh or tenth day pass before you treat it for the apoplexy.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	Then introduce in the end of the nose a piece of cloth, if the fracture is in one part, or two thin pieces, if the fracture is in two parts; and let it be of such a thickness as to fill the width of the nose.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And I say of the ancient restoring things that the pieces should be wrapped in a cloth, and they should be changed every day; but I have not seen it; only know that the piece is wrapped in cotton wool with powder; and then leave it until the bone has stopped moving and the cartilage has hardened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And some are put together in the nose instead of one piece, unless it is wrapped in a cloth; and let it be that the fracture has already been made more violent, and that breathing is not prevented by the patient.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	This cause is not necessary for you; and if you want, make it one piece, and if you want, make two pieces.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if another apoplexy comes; apply the nose with wax or with a paste of vinegar and rose water, or with diazonium sulfate.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	Maybe if no apoplexy comes; then you should know that you apply it outside with the flour of sizami and the dust of elderberries and the albumen of egg; and let it rest on top of a cloth, and do not put the nose in any cause.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	Maybe if the bones of the nose are broken or cracked; then you should know that you cut them apart, and take out those which are broken with an instrument suitable for those; and then sew up the wound, and treat it with water which is warm and solid, and apply with wax to it.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	And if you have plague inside the nose; then you should know that you treat it with one piece and administer a pipe of lead until it is completely healed.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter. iv.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	Of restoring the jaw when it is broken.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jaw is broken and the fracture is not caused by plague; then consider whether it is only at one end that it is broken, and if it is curved to the pieces inside, the knowledge of it is limited.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	And then, if the fracture is on the right side, introduce the little finger of the left hand into the patient' s mouth; and seemingly, if the fracture is on the left side, then introduce the little finger of the right hand; and push it outside with ease at the ends, with your other hand at the end which is broken; and make it equal with that end.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two parts; then you should administer extension of two pieces according to right angles so that the equality of it is possible.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if there is a concussion of the teeth and a disruption; then strengthen those which you hope will remain, with wire of gold or silver or cedar; and place them on the broken jaw with wax, and place over it a double cloth, and place a single cloth above it; and place over that a star-shaped piece of linen nicely made, or a chain of one length along the length of it; and then treat it as if it were bound up, until it is not destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And order the patient to use rest and quietness, and pause their food of hot drinks.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you suspect that the shape has already been changed in some way; then take care of it and leave it for three days; and then correct it which has already been changed and apply wax to it, with powder or flour, because you will have taken off the cloth from it, and place over it a piece of wool.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And then, when that is annexed, adjust the wax which has been applied to it, and the disposition of the bone is not changed, leave it alone until it is healed and strengthen the fracture; because you have seen this fracture in three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if another apoplexy comes; then administer water which has been boiled with the herbs we have said, until it is healed, and then treat the apoplexy.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is caused by plague; then consider whether it is a big piece or a little one; then you should know that you move those little pieces with water which moves them in the movement of those instruments.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the orifice of the plague is straight; then you should know that you amplify it with a needle according to the quantity of your need.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	Then when you have moved those little pieces; and if there is a big hole; then sew it up with the thread which has been boiled, and then treat the hole with water which is warm.
Capitol .v.	Chapter. v.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	Of restoring the forehead when it is broken.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	The bone is broken by twisting the furcula from in front of the muscle, and this fracture occurs in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	Or it is broken, or separated, or separated into two parts other than the injuries that occur in them; and it is easier to restore them; or they are so injured that they separate them, and it is difficult to restore them; or they are so injured that the fracture is a painful one.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And the operation in that, when the fracture is a painful one, is that you have two ministers present, so that one has an aid and keeps the broken bone steady, and the other extends the loop over that break.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	Then bring the fracture close to your body so that its shape is determined according to how it curves, and not in a small eminence or concave area.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if you need to extend it more, then cover that break with a piece of cloth or wool, and make the size large enough according to your need; and spread out and raise the furcula and wrap it with your hand so that you bring the fracture close according to how it curves.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot bring the end of the furcula to the outside breaks, since it reaches the chin, then cover that break with a cushion placed on its neck, and place another smaller one under the muscle.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the minister press the muscle on the patient's thighs so that the bone of the furcula is raised up to reach its chin, and then you correct the fracture and bring it close according to how it curves.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	Or if you feel pain from the furcula and it is a little painful, then cover that break and cut off those parts with ease.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is held in the bone, then you invent a sharp tool from it that you have placed aside the furcula, as you have placed your hand on the break; and this tool is of wood or iron, and this is its shape:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And it seems like a vessel from which this is the concave part; and its width should be according to the water that you need for it, according to the size of the bone or the thinness of it.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	Or the length of it should be according to what is possible for the operation; that there are two ends like this, and one end be wide and the other narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the break from which you have cut off the injury is wide, and it is certain that a poultice will help heal it, then you adjust the two lips of the wound with suture.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the break is small, or you fear that it will not heal with a poultice, then you use cloth and powder according to the quantity of the wound's lip.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if it is so that it will not heal with a poultice, then pour wine and rose oil in a cloth, and place it over that.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	And the tightness of the bone when it is broken and cut is that you place a paste made from flour and egg white on it, and place it over the heel, and cover that break with your hand, if you feel pain from it; and cover it with a cloth, and place that cloth under the fracture, and cover it again; and cover that with a cloth, and place that cloth in front of the fracture, and cover it; and place a small pole over the table, whose length is about three fingers and its width like this; and wrap that cloth around the pole, and place it on top of the fracture; and cover that pole again with that cloth; and cover it with a cloth, and place that cloth under that pole; and uncover it, then turn it over, then cover that over the heel and hand, and reduce it again whenever the fracture becomes looser.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And altogether, so that the pole does not hurt the broken bone; and every day, when the joint becomes softer or you see that the pole has already been loosened, then you correct it and tighten the binding.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And place the patient' sleep on his neck, and place a small cushion under it to raise its head a little; so that the support for it is raised from the neck of him, and then the fracture of the furcula is raised higher than the muscle; or the arms of him are tied to the pole.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	Do not remove the joint if it does not hurt you immediately, nor does it cause pain in the place immediately; until twelve days have passed.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And then renew the paste if you have seen the face of it in water, and adjust its tightness and restore that one, so that it is restored and its fracture is congealed; and place a cloth over that break.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it is strengthened and supported according to the month in 28 days, and in some cases it is made in a month of time from him.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	The Restoration of a Shoulder Fracture.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	A tart with a spatula is broken in the location below the shoulder, and not broken from the shoulder itself but from the edges.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And when it is broken from the location below the shoulder - and it is broken from the middle of the shoulder - and is not known except by touch, then according to the figure of the fracture you prepare it and reduce that according to the natural shape in any way that you can imagine; and here is how you do that:
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	And then cover that location with flour and egg white, and place a cloth on the pole; and place another cloth on the table according to the quantity of the spatula; all or a little.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	Or if the pole is concave in some of the places of the spatula, then you bring that concave part close with egg white, and place the pole according to equality.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And then tighten it very well with a long hand of rope and by holding the pole tight, so that it does not come apart from its place.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	Consider the joint every day; and altogether, if it becomes softer, then loosen it again and tighten it if it has already come apart from its place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And beat the patient on his back with a cloth.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	And the spatula is restored in 20 or 25 days.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And when that number is complete, then you dissolve the binding, and may your hand be certain that it is one of the bones whose beginning is not painful and its end also.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you press on the broken bone's location and put a cloth aside it, then you cut it apart, and place it away; and do as we said in the fracture of the furcula with poultice to heal it quickly if you need it.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	The Restoration of a Foot Fracture.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The foot is sometimes broken in the middle of it and that is a hard break; or the ends of it are broken and those are cut up, like cicadas.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And from the accidents of the foot when it is broken that part declines inside and there is a pain in it, and difficulty in walking, and strong beating and vomiting; and it is declared in its cavity in the broken bone and is not hidden from feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And the restoration of it is that the patient be placed on his back, and a cushion placed between his thighs; then press the muscles of him, and adjust his ribs according to the size of two ribs, and carefully do the operation and reduce that according to how it curves, so that its shape is determined according to what is possible for you, and return it to its figure according to how it was before.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	Here is the translation of the text:
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	And if necessity causes the dislocation of that, or pruritus, or pain, or edema that occurs in the place, then you tie it and loosen it and remove the poultice and correct what happens to it by means of cure; and let him reduce the poultice, if sometimes he makes it wet; and adjust the stricture until it is healed.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter .viii.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	On the Restoration of Fractures When They Are Broken.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	You should know that a rib fracture occurs only in two places, from the top or bottom, and from these does not come into contact with the other until they are very close; and of the ends of them, from where they depart, comes into contact with the others by means of cartilage.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And do not hide your knowledge from inquiry about it, as you say.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration be thus that it joins the fracture by means of what is possible, taking into account where it is covered, and let him poultice and tighten the broken bone with a bandage, if you fear for it.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And if the rib fracture is declining towards the top or bottom, then severe pain and puncturing occurs in the patient, as well as what happens to him when he has wept, and because of this the bone is covered with a veil; and difficulty in healing, coughing, and vomiting by reason of the wind; and this is a difficult cure.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And the Ancients have devised such things for it.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And of them it is said: "Cover the patient's food so that it does not cause inflammation and wind, so that the abdomen is swollen and extended, and the fracture is driven towards the outside joints."
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	Let us avoid that for us not to be a cause of lightheadedness to generate edema from the poultice, unless it happens; and if it already happens, then help is on its way.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And they say of them that it should be stopped from being windy and that it should be drunk with strength; and it is similar to reasoning, but it is more feared that the wind will throw away the superfluity to the place because of its weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	And they say of them: "Cover the place with wool that has already been submerged in oil, and let powders be placed between the ribs until it is filled up, which is a binding bandage when you have wrapped it up according to its roundness; and let the patient be cured with the cure of pleurisy from food and medicine."
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if violent constriction causes the patient pain, and the bone is covered with a veil due to itching, they fear for the patient, then let them break open that place, uncover the rib fracture, and remove it with difficulty; and let me engrave the bone with ease, and extract it.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And let us adjust the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a burn, and let us bind that one with poultices until it is healed.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if edema occurs inside, then you tie it and place powders of rose oil on the place, and let it be cured with water that covers the edema inside.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And let it be raised up above the bed where it sleeps, until it is healed.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter .ix.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	On the Restoration of a Fracture in the Vertebral Column of the Back and Neck.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Some veins break the bones of the neck, and similarly to those of the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And if you want to know whether it will be healed or not with water, consider that, since sometimes the muscles of those are softened and stupified and dead and cannot move or extend or tighten those, and when you squeeze them with your fingers or prick them with a needle, they do not feel pain in them; then you should know that it will not be healed, and, in their disposition, it is deadly.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if those muscles ache and feel constriction when you touch them or prick them with a needle, then you should know that the spine of the bone is saved, and that the patient is being cured.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you see how similar the spines of the neck are to water, and want to know whether it will be healed or not, then consider the feet of the patient.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	And if you see that they are already softened, then it happens to them with water that happens in the most cases, and when you get on their back, there is windiness and defecation according to their will; and some cover their back with their hand, and urinate, and cannot; then you should know that it is deadly, and do not treat him.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	But if any of those causes does not happen, the cause is better and less harmful.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And the patient' cure is that you pierce into the edema of the poultice that you pause over the vertebral column behind a rose oil, or with a herb of garlic; pause over that one for a few moments until it is sedated.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And then he places a comfortable poultice on it, and tightens it with a bandage; and command the patient not to move or sleep on the broken part until it is healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if the vertebral bone is broken or some other cause has separated it from itself, then let him be cut off above that, and let him be joined with a nail; and let us adjust the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a sutura; and let us cure that one with rose oil, within that it is healed.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	But if the hind bone of the spine is broken, and it is the end of the fracture, then let him enter the little finger of the left hand into the mouth of the patient, and join the broken bone to the other with a bandage as closely as possible; and let him pause over the poultice and splint, if you want to do so, and let him fasten it securely.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel broken spines in him, then you tie it up, and let him be tied up, and let him be cured with the cure that precedes it until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De restauracio de la ancha.	On the Restoration of the Wound.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the neck are sometimes broken, and if they are broken, then the fracture is only in their ends, and they are blunted in length and decline towards the joints; and pain occurs in the patient at the place, and the skin is stupified when the fracture happens.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And the restoration of him is that you extend your hand over it, so that it covers the fracture, which is its figure.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	And if the fracture is only at the end of it, then you tie it up according to your clothing, so that it matches its natural figure.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	But if the fracture is in length, or it has already declined towards the joints, then you prepare your patient for the restoration of that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And then, when you have tied it up, pause over the poultice, and let him fasten it with a bandage, and tighten it on that which does not cause pain of fracture or movement of the stelha.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And fill the cavity with what fills it in there, so that this takes its form according to equality, and order the slave to sleep on his back or open his side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	But if it happens that the wound is putrid, then stop the extention and rest of him until the putridness is stopped, and place over him what sits there according to what comes before; and return to the rest of him, and strengthen it with a cover.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if bones are broken or fractured, then treat them.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	Of the Restoration of a Fracture of the Thighbone.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	Thighbone is that which is between the hip and the top of the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is broken, then the restoration of him is in two ways, and one of them is that you take a strong plait of grass according to this form:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And be tied in two ends with two knots, and then hang him from the raised place.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And follow the slave on a ladder; and then pour out his broken arm onto the plait where it reaches to the tip of him in the middle place where he is joined with the curvedness of the plait.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And hang him from some heavy cause, or the cook extends that to the sides of him; and then bring the doctor and that which heals the fracture together, so that the fracture returns according to what comes before; and then return to the rest of him.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And the other way is that the slave is raised up on his neck and hung by his hand; and then order two ministers that one of them hold water which is opened with its form; and the other holds the pus from him; and each of them extends to its side.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want the extension to be stronger, then order to be held by two plaitings and by another, and each of the ministers extends to two sides.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And if the fracture is near to the end of the muscle, then stop that which is held by the half of the plait on the hip and by the other side, so that it reaches from him to the fracture where he is joined with the hip.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And if the fracture is near to the hip, then stop that which is held on that place and over the hip.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Take it with ease and effort, and then return it according to what comes before, and apply it by good application, then strengthen it if putridness does not happen.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	But if putridness happens, then order the stricture to be opened on the seventh day, and place over it a woolen cloth dipped in wine vinegar and honey within which it rests, and then strengthen it.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	And the way to strengthen that is to place plaster over the fracture, and then cover it with a drape of sailcloth; and then adjust the arm above the thighbone, and place your hand over its muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And then return the drape and strengthen it above the thighbone, so that the arm is in its place of support, if you do not command from any cause of the broken bone.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	Then use of supports.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And that which is held over the fracture is stronger than the others and more solid of them; and place between each plait the distance of the thumb, and the length of the plaits according to the break together with three fingers' width of the whole distance.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And then strengthen above the plaits with the same stricture which was spoken of at the beginning of this chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And that your stricture on that place is more solid.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And when the putridness has been opened, then order that which is less strict.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And if you move the position of the plaits and the stricture as we said at the hour when you restore the limb to its situation, then do so.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear putridness, then order that which is opened and the plaits to be left for seven days as we said before.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And then consider the plait in all parts for three days, so that nothing happens to it in that place of pruziment or swelling; or is forbidden food to reach the limb by disposition of superfluity of stricture; and then correct all this according to what we have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	But if you are certain that nothing happens of it, then do not remove the plaster until three or more days have passed.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And let the slave sleep on his back, and his hands are on his chest.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And then place over the thighbone a full bowl of woolen cloth, and consider for all the night or day whether the figure of the broken limb is not changed or loosened; and if it is soft, then correct all this by your virtue.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And then the slave's food is according to the order which we have said before, that it is not strong at first, but becomes stronger as it is eaten; and then stop that it becomes larger by adding more.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	And the custom of the slave and his chest is that they are strong in thirty days; and then stop that and are taken away, and water is given to him, and medicine is given to him with what corrects it.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is stiff, then do not remove that which holds the plait and the plaits within a month or within two months.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	Of the Restoration of a Fracture of the Arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The arm is composed of two bones which are called two sockets; the one is small, and that is what supports the hand; and the other is large, and that is what is held by the shoulder from the side which is more distant.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	The large socket is broken only with great force, or with both ends together.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when the small socket is broken above, then the restoration of him is slight, and his healing is also slightly.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when the small socket is broken below, the fracture of him is bad, and his healing is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And worse than that is when both bones are broken together.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Then if the broken bone is the small socket above, then it is convenient to the doctor, and order its restoration that which is held by ease within which it is placed.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	But if the large socket is broken, then stop that which is more violent.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both sockets are broken together, then order to be held by force with ease.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	Then stop the figure of the hand with its own hand, and then extend it over a cushion, and place the palm of the hand on the sides, more than all the others say, and that which is auricular is lower than the others, and order the slave to sit on a cushion.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And be a cushion before him at the height or above him, so that the slave does not work.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	Then order the minister to extend the arm from its shoulder or plait, and another minister extends above it with ease.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	Then order the doctor to hold the bone within which it is shaped according to the best form that can be.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if the fracture is putrid, then order it to be treated in its place by your virtue.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if it appears in him separation that punctures the skin and is not according to your hope in the restoration of him, then stop him from him and proceed as we said before.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	If the fracture is causing pain, I have already made a single cut, so then proceed to the cure for that.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if it happens that a swelling occurs at the beginning of your recovery, then line a cloth with olive oil and white wax, and be careful to make it thin between refinement and subtility, and tightly wrap the cloth around it so that the swelling gives way; and then remove the cloth and apply a paste made from powder ground from clay and honey, and place plasters; and let that plaster which is placed over that fracture on one side and more securely on the other.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And know that the name of the plasters for the arms is in the majority of cases, or that the fracture is in one place or in two places together.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	Then place your tightness in the place of the fracture more firmly and more violently, and when the tightness goes to the parts below the fracture or to the parts higher up, place the tightness a little less tightly according to whether it is preceded by the memory of it at the beginning of the chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the cloths that are wrapped around the fracture be soft cloths wetted with humors, and not hard or rough, and the thread with which it is tightly wrapped be of a fine cloth between refined and thick, and so we have recalled.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	And consider the member the part that is affected.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if there is any cause for which correction is necessary, so carefully considering the member that causes it, and then cover so that you inject water into it from a tail so that that prudence ceases.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	Then release the member does not constrict it so that it rests, and then return to the tightness.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the tightness is already softened and the bone seems to have healed with the appearance of bones, then correct it altogether by your virtue.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And consider if nutrition is prohibited from reaching the member due to excessive tightness, for when it softens a little and leaves it for some days so that it runs to that nutrition, then tighten it again.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	If there is no cause for those things which we have said to the patient, then do not cover it so that it is released within 10 days or a little more than those.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And then let the servant's hand be suspended by his virtue of moving agitation, and make him sleep on his back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	And know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or in 32 days, or it is firmly restored in 25 days, and all of it depends on the arrangements of the complexities and the arrangements of virtue.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	Of the Restoration of a Fracture of the Hand of the Ma and of What Is Said.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	And know that for the hand and fingers of the Ma and of what is said the fracture ends with the heart, and do not occur to them except in rare cases.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when it happens to the ma or back fracture, then return the servant who is falling and facing him on an equal line, and then place his hand in front of him.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	And the minister spread out the broken bones so that they are joined together with good joinery.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	Then apply paste and manure, if it does not occur to you a swelling occurs; then place plasters according to the quantity of space, and you have already wrapped that in a cloth.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	If the pinching is in the inner parts of the palm, then make a shape of cloth, and command the servant to tighten it with his palm pinched; and be tightly bound with long cloth.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And place the cauldron of wax on the cloth so that the wax is applied to the palm, and tighten it according to whether it is needed.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	If the fracture is at the outer parts, then return the stela above and another stela from the outer part of the palm, so that the hand is raised and turned; and then tighten it, so as to turn the hand between the fingers with a stela.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	And if it happens to the fracture in one of the fingers of the Ma and of What Is Said, then, if it is the small finger, tighten it according to whether it is needed and place a small stela on the hand so that the fracture is raised and not crushed.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	If the fracture is in any of the other fingers of the Ma and of What Is Said, then, if it is in one of them, or in all of them together, then tighten it and bind it with a thread according to continuity; it is better; or place a small stela on it, as we have said in the small finger.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider, in your restoration, and return it, the arrangement of the swelling and opposition – to the right operation – to water that occurs when there is any cause, according to which the narration of it is repeated.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter XIV.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	Of the Restoration of a Fracture of the Bone of the Thigh.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The thigh bones that are seen moving is broken and declared to the sense according to whether it turns in front and rises from behind.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	The restoration of it is made in nine days or the limb is tightened on the fracture and another limb from the fracture, and the servant is prostrate on his belly and on his face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	And the minister spread out the whole limb according to its quantity, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	If the fracture is in the edge of the thigh, then make the limb spread out on its back at the edge of the fifth limb, so that the extension falls thereon, and the other limb leave the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And if the fracture is at the edge of the back, then make the limb spread out on its back, and place the extension on the outer parts.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And the minister joins the bone to its two sides within so that it reduces itself according to the natural appearance and the bone is joined together by good joining, then apply paste and tightness, if it does not occur to you a swelling occurs on the member.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	If it happens in the swelling, then you leave it for some days within so that the swelling occurs on it, and then return to your cure.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The tightness of it is done thus: wrap the fracture with a hard cloth, and double it two or three times, and remove any excess; and then wrap the chest within so that it reaches the neck and the edge of the thigh.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And put a long thread between the thigh and the chest from behind, and bring the ends of the thread from the outer parts of the two parts, and tie them together tightly within so that they do not slip; and then return them to their places on the cloth and the thigh.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And then place it on the thigh in the place of that broken sthela, and place one stela on the bone of the chest.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	And then fill in the spaces between the chest and thigh with soft cloths, so that the tightness is secured.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And then begin with the tightness of the middle one on the place of the fracture with three or four wrappings, and how much more you remove from the part of the fracture, your tightness be lesser and less constricting and more wet.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	And then extend the two ends of the thread to the outer parts within so that it reaches the neck, and tighten both ends of the thread from the other part so that the limb is not lifted from its place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And then leave the tightness on it, provided that no swelling or swelling occurs in the member, nor does a swelling occur from above; and if it happens to any cause of those things, then take care of your fear for it, and correct what happens altogether, according to whether we have said that the cause is.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is broken, then it must be set in place as soon as possible; if not, then go to him and hold him steady, and cure that from which this memory was caused until he is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And for some, this fracture of the thigh is strengthened by certain bones that are fixed to it with nails, as I have said above in the assistant and in the arms.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	But nevertheless, in the restoration of him in such a way that it does not occur to the patient's limping; and if it is restored alone, another one that is applied to his other leg, then it is necessary for him to limp from that from which this memory was caused.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And know that the thigh is strengthened in 40 days or a few more or a few fewer, and all of this is according to the diversity of conditions and other dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	Of the Restoration of the Fracture of the Ankle-joint of the Foot.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	Know that this fracture of the ankle-joint of the foot is more likely to occur in those who ride horses.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	But if it occurs to the fracture, then it is not so much a crack or a break in its parts; and this is what causes pain or an ache, and everything else is according to its feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And the restoration of him is to be made as soon as he is broken at his joints with nails within such a time that he may be joined and made whole according to the possibility, by ease and convenience and construction.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	Then apply plaster and place it over that round stone if you wish for that one; and strengthen it with astringent to the water in an appropriate way.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	Then consider all the dispositions which we have recommended in other fractures, also with a poultice applied that is hot and similar to those from which one does not move or go until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	Of the Restoration of the Fracture of the Back.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	Know that there are two bones in the spine, of which one is thick, and this is called the spinal bone; and the other is thin, and it is called the ribs.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And it occurs to either of the two kinds of fracture in the arm bones, and this is how restoration of him occurs as soon as the setting of the arm, and the operation of it is one and the same.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if two bones are broken together, the spine is broken into pieces.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if one of the thin bones is broken, then the spine is broken from behind.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if the thick bone is broken, it breaks the rib from below; and this is of those causes that are not familiar to you.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	Then administer astringent and ligation to the ribs according to the setting of it.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	But nevertheless, if the fracture of the spine is not severe and there are no broken ribs, then the ligation should be mild and light; and it will give pleasure to your virtue.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	But for the operation of the arms, when you set the bones and complete all of the work, then take two pieces of a branch of a tree that is left behind the causes from which they are taken; cut them short according to those which are small; do not cut them from the branches, but make them according to the length of the spine, and from the back into smaller pieces.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	Then wrap each drape in two envelops according to its length, and place one over the joint of the spine from one part and another over the joint of the spine from the other part, and both should be placed from the back into a small space at the base of the neck.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	Then tie the two bones in three places of the two extremities and at the middle one; for this arrangement of the spine prevents it from bending to the right or left, and is in a good position.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	Then one piece of wood has been made according to the length of the spine; and it is placed in such a way that it retains its movement.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And above all, when you have broken this, then cure it when it has been broken, and when it is healed.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Then consider the spine every day and study it with great care, and you protect it from swelling or swelling or any similar cause; and if you notice any of these causes, then avoid him from doing this to the one that is broken until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	Of the Fracture of the Skull and the Bones of the Neck and the Jaws.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	The skull does not break in its entirety; but in the bones of the neck, it breaks in some cases; and in the jaws of the neck, it breaks in a few cases, and it occurs to them according to their disposition.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if the bones of the neck are broken and those bones are raised up above each other, then the patient should be placed on his back on the ground prepared for this; and carrying him in this way.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	Then place one of the legs over that which is raised by those bones, and press them together; and set them in such a way that they fit into their places.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	Then apply plaster and stop up them, and place the legs of the patient on a small table, whose two ends are turned upward.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	Then strengthen that one with the neck in its place, as you have wrapped it in drapes and with other causes from which you suffer.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	After three or four days, then remove the plaster, because you will see that the bones are set in place, or if they are broken or if they have moved; and the operation on them is such.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	If some of the jaws are broken, then restore them, and set them in place as soon as possible; and recommend to you in the restoration of the jaws of the hand.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	Then place the broken jaw on a stone according to its length, and make it slight; then put the feet of the patient on the table that you have recommended to you, and strengthen that one with astringent in an appropriate way.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	If the broken bones of the jaw are two or three or more, then you place each one on a stone that is wrapped in drapes, and strengthen the table with it in its base; and make it stand on one end of the table, and place the feet of the patient on the other end of the table so that it has good retention.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is convenient to you that you do not forget that you consider all the causes which I have said to you in other fractures of the accidents that we have mentioned; and avoid him from any accident to those ones.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	Of the Fracture of the Hip-joint of the Woman and of the Thigh-bone of the Man and the Skull of the Man.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the hip-joint of the woman is broken, then make it sit on the ground; and turn it towards the right leg slightly; and hold it in place.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	Then the mother should bend her hip towards the floor; and turn it slightly towards the right leg, as soon as she is able to; and the woman should be made to lie on her back, and lift both legs slightly upwards, because all of this is forgotten until it is in front of the joint of the hip, with a hope and the broken thigh-bone returns.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	Then place powder on both legs; and when he wishes to urinate, then turn his hip with ease, and urinate while sitting down; and reduce it again and return him to his first powder, making the same movements as before; and bring him back to his powder first.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And it should be done so for seven days or up to when he has recovered.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you want, take a bladder of olive oil and stretch it over the patient's nose with a cannula made of cane; and put all the bladder inside the patient's nose, and blow into the cannula until the bladder is inflated inside the patient's nose, because the fracture comes back.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	Then let it be filled with cotton and kept for a few days according to how much has healed, then let it be healed.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the bones of the hip or foot are broken, then administer the restoration and injection of blood that we have mentioned above in the bone of the hip.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And that blood which is on the right does not hide in these close fractures and that it rarely happens, but mostly to him who has studied and practiced this my book; for that fracture means to you in the major ways of right-handedness in the restoration and strictness of it, and therefore understand well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	And if the staff of the man is broken, take a splint, and put the staff in that; and place it over his wrapping of cloth, and let it be wrapped up, and let it be left for three days or up to when he has recovered, then let it be healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	On the Restoration of Fractures of Bones When There is Swelling.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	Convenient is to him to whom the fracture happens, and mainly if the bone is large as that of the thigh or of the neighbor, or similar to that, that you protect it and let blood there as often as the circumstances of bloodletting allow it, and as we have said above with respect to the same.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the swelling subsides, then know that you protect it from the re-occurrence of blood before you powder on it dried blood, unless there is another cause presented.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And then begin to restore the fracture in that same day, and do not prolong it, unless there is a swelling.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	But if the swelling comes on slowly, then let the restoration of it be left until the ninth day, until the swelling subsides, and do not approach it in the third day after the ninth, for you would make a bad accident happen.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	But if the broken bone is prominent above the joint covered, then know that you should reduce it and close it with your own hands easily and little extension.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	But if extension is not prepared for you and the equation of it with your own hands, then reduce it with your own hands as well; and this instrument which is made of iron, its length is seven fingers or eight, and its width is according to the amount of blood; and therefore it is necessary for the doctor to take three or four according to the quantity that you require for the treatment in all kinds of fractures.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And let it be rolled up and be in it a little bit of grass that it does not bend the compression on it at the time of the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And let it be of acute tip at which is margin in its tips; and let the string that holds it be of great thickness, and of most of it within the splits.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	This is the form of it:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	And it is named in Greek "labra volent zaratem", which means little palm.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	So that the end of it be raised above the prominent end of the bone.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And let it be placed in a vice until the bone returns to its place, and is closed with some equation.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And therefore strive to close the ends of the fracture between them, and if the end of the broken bone is small, and do not take that instrument for a good operation, then know that you pierce the end of that bone until the instrument has power over it.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	But if you cannot reduce the bone completely with the water that we have mentioned above, then cut it with the knife of the incisers which we have said; or saw it with one of the saws in some way is possible for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	And then remove what remains in the bone of small sharpness and little scars.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone has been reduced, and the reduction of the patient causes a violent painful throbbing, then know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and therefore do what you have done to the patient gives him great relief.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When your reduction of the bone is completed, and then dip cloth in black antiseptic, especially if it is in summer, and do not approach the swelling with your hand or any other cause in which salt is applied, so that it does not cause in it a bad corrosion and decay.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And then administer the bloodletting in the hour of the third compliment of the bone's restoration, and leave the swelling uncovered in order that you cut with scissors and use bandages according to the amount of the swelling.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And keep all your care that you do not strain the swelling with the fracture, for it will cause bad things to happen, and make bad accidents happen to the patient's own malady or its corrosion or decay, so it is cured.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if the patient' s constriction loosens, softens, different from the constriction of other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the swelling is great or is bad swelling, and you are afraid that you will experience those bad accidents that we have mentioned above, then do not let it be covered with a cloth, but rather wrap it in a hard cloth instead of a soft one at the place of the bandage, and use a pointed cautery to make points on the surface of the foot.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And when the swelling has begun to appear after one or two days, that it is very hot, then you remove the cloth with which you had covered it from above with a cloth, and then administer cold water, wetting the same with which our custom is that we treat swellings, thus cooling them down with four-part water and similar to that.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	And know that you should cut off the limb and consider the swelling in every day from morning until evening until it is hardened and firm, and know that the member has been prepared so that the bad corrosion runs from it to the splits of the leaves with ease.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If the swelling has passed more than a few days and it is neither hardened nor separated from it the limb, then know that there are only two possibilities, either to leave it alone or to take care of it.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And of those things that are separated and extracted remain and are taken away, those that are not separated and the member is made to cause pain, then know that you should cut those according as what water can be done.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	And if the swelling is swollen or rotten, so it is signs of corruption or decay, then know that you should leave one of those with water which you have mentioned above as a treatment for which a narration precedes in its chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o .xxx.; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And of that in which know that you should be calm and present your case: When the bone is broken, emerge on the member as well as the bones of the hips and shoulders and similar to those of the large members, and do not assume attraction from it or extrication from it, for it will cause a bad accident to happen by water; and leave it within which you can return, for it is firm support over itself for about twenty days or up to when he has recovered. And then take care of the swelling if it is visible, and if not leave that.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	On the treatment of a swelling that occurs in the trace of a fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Here is the translation of the provided text:
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	"Then consider if the accident is recent and administer those medicines that have been recommended for it, and stir, and look at, and search, and compare with those; then take some of those or all, and apply those to the wound in a poultice, and constrain those over it for good constriction."
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	"Then leave the constriction in place for a few days; then remove it and repeat it, unless the accident is improved; or press down on that plate of lead, because lead has the property of removing whatever is inflated in the limbs."
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"But if the accident has already become fixed and severe, and necessity forces you to cut it, then cut it from the most superior part of the limb, and slice off the excess and prominent part, or tear it with razor blade until it is healed."
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	"Of restoring a Fracture. When the fracture is restored and it is necessary to bring back the limb to its usual shape, then do not force it."
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	"When the bone fracture is healed and it is necessary to bring back the limb to its usual shape, then do not force it except for a few causes: one of which is that the ligament becomes weak because of many solutions, or by excess of constriction of the ligaments so that nutrition is prevented from reaching the member; or because of a lot of useless encumbrance; or because of excessive movement at an inappropriate time; or because of a lack of blood in the body and to treat it.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	"And for the cure of it, give food to the patient and make his heart firm until the blood is multiplied in him; and administer a bath; and introduce needles and leech-bites into it."
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	"Then return the limb to its usual position, so that the peg draws nutrition to it, or continuous encumbrance of water is applied to it, until the nutrition returns and reaches its normal shape."
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	"Of the Treatment of Twisted Bones When Restored and Preventing the Operation of Them from That Place That Caused It."
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	"When the limb is already restored to health because of twisting and prominence on the twisted bone and the nodulation of it, and yet the form of the limb is disturbed, but nevertheless the limb is not prevented from its natural operation, then do not take the word of one who says that the limb that exists is a new twist."
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	"But already there are some medicine and restaurators that have done this to our land; and this operation is very abominable, losing the sign of fear of which one dies."
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	"But if the claudication and accident are recent, then consider that they should be treated with water-based broths that are cooked herbs, leaves of aloes, and raisin juice, mixed with a little olive oil; or with mucilage made from aloe leaves, and applied to it; or with grass oils, and wrapped in furs; and similar to those of the medicines that are called emollients."
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	"And some times it is dissolved with a slight friction that is very moist, and it is administered movement of the limb from the beginning at all times."
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	"But if twisting has already been added beforehand and it is severe, and the accident has become a cause of need for it to be treated with fire, then consider that the pus above it is dried up, and the continuation of the bone is dissolved, and cut off whatever excess there is of the accident of that member with a fine scalpel, and administered easily to that which is sollicited and studied."
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter 23.
De sermo en dislocacio.	"Of Speaking in Dislocation."
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	"Dislocation is a separation of any of the joints of the limb, by which it is prevented from moving, and the figure of the member is disturbed, and great pain and injury come upon the patient."
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	"Then consider if you have dislocation, then try to reduce it quickly, because if it is delayed, the joint is swollen and greatly interfered with."
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	"And therefore do not try to massage or stretch it at the time of the reduction, because it has been shown that this causes spasms and pain."
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	"But if it happens to you, then consider that you retreat from the surgery of the limb, and it is allowed to rest until the swelling passes; and the member is bathed with water and oil, and reduced easily."
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	"And all members are treated with that water from which memory will come in its place."
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	"And the eyes have already been ordered and the chapters of dislocation are arranged according to whether they precede fracture; from the superior part of the limb to the inferior."
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter 24.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	"Of the Treatment of Mandibular Dislocation."
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	"The two mandibulars are dislocated if they do not bite; and the dislocation of both is done in one of two ways: either they are separated a little by movement, or completely dislocated and completely separated, so that they are softened at the joint before the saliva comes out of the mouth, so that it cannot be closed and the tongue of it is wrapped up in the word."
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	"But if the dislocation is little, then in the major preparations return because there is a little cause for concern."
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	"But if the dislocation is entire and complete, then consider that it be reduced with a slight friction, and not delayed at all."
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	"And if the minister has the head of the patient, and he enters the mouth with a needle, then consider that it dislocates the mandible inwardly from one side; or that he enters with two needles together, if the dislocation is of both sides, and all others of him are outside those which he enters; and order the patient to cease his jaws and absolve them in any way; and the needle wraps the mandible and brings it back to its place."
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	"But if the reduction is difficult, and especially if both mandibles are completely dislocated, then administer evaporating with water and oil, so that the reduction of both is slight, and do not delay the reduction of both at all, except for this: that the mouth is closed."
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	"And so return and be engualled, and the mouth of the patient is closed and not softened, then put them on a cloth of silk, and make it with wax and oil rosin; and then reduce easily with pliable limbs."
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	"And let the patient sleep on his back, and his head between two pillows, so that he does not bite on either side; and do not force him to swallow any cause; having forbidden food for lions, because when the pain is improved and the mandibles are clenched, then bite it."
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	"And let it be administered easily, and do not work on the opening of the mouth for eating and drinking and calling out, except that the mandible is clenched and healed."
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if it is difficult to reduce two mandibles when they are dislocated at any time and do not return to their original places, then there will be frequent fevers and frequent vomiting of soda, and the abdomen of the patient will be very swollen, and he will vomit pure cholera.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you see this, know that it is a waste of time; and the one who experiences this will die within ten days.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	On the Reduction of a Dislocated Hip and an Extremity of a Muscle
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The furcula is not dislocated from the inside by its continuation to the foot; and some are dislocated from the outside at the beginning, and this is pronounced.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And the restoration of it is that the patient lies down on his back and extends his legs.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	Then cut the place with your strong palm, for it will return.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	Then put a plaster and grind and strengthen it.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	Maybe the extremity of that which cuts off and continues to that, is not dislocated in any day; then cover it so that it is reduced and enclosed according to what I have said, and according to your apparatus.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	Then put a plaster on it, and grind, and tighten, and order the patient to rest until it is healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And in this cure the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	On the Reduction of a Dislocated Muscle
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	Know that the muscle is not dislocated unless according to three ways, and one of them is that it is dislocated at the beginning of the rib at the beginning of the thigh.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is that it is dislocated from its middle part of the muscle, and this is a great pain; and it is not dislocated from behind by the shoulder, and it is not dislocated from in front by the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And mostly it is dislocated and comes out from behind the rib at the beginning of the thigh, and mostly in those parts where there are few muscles, it is dislocated with difficulty; but in those where there are many muscles, it comes out with effort.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And a great many men experience percussion or impact, and the muscle of them is swollen with swelling caused by the hand that has already been dislocated; and it is felt by the one who has been dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Then cover it so that you are not above it, and then proceed to the cure of it.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And the dislocation of it is recognized when it is at the beginning of the rib; but so that you can distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the healthy one, because there is a great difference between them; and touch the concav part of the muscle and the rib as much as a bird's wing, and the patient cannot reduce his shoulder to its place, nor can he move it at all.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is dislocated from below the rib or above it, and you feel a clear touch, and there is no doubt about it.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And of this dislocation, a slight reduction is made when it is fresh, and the patient is a child.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction of it is that the minister raises his arm up to its shoulder; then stop the ties on either side of the rib of him, and raise the joint with force into its place, and the minister raises his arm, and extends it before him; then stop those on both sides because they return with difficulty.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	Maybe if by what I have said it does not return, and only from the beginning where the dislocation occurs, then after three days, know that the patient is bathed in cold water and given a fomentation that softens and relaxes him as much as if his joints were pulled out, and fenugrec, and melilot in water, and be administered.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	Then the patient is to be placed on his back and paused on both sides of him waiting for the hair to dry, which has been softened by the fomentation, and then the doctor pauses his foot on the spine, and raises his head with power, and throws the patient's hand so that it is not lifted up towards the ribs, and another minister holds his head, so that he does not lift it towards the ribs, because this returns to its place.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you want, reduce this second way: and it is that you should have a man present who is longer than the patient, and be on his side, and insert his arm under the rib of the patient and raise his rib to its shoulder while suspending the patient in the air, and another minister holds the patient' hand from behind the ribs.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	Maybe if the patient is very painful, know that he should not be suspended because it returns soon.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And it is reduced in this way: and it is that he should be fixed on the ground with a long staff, which is round in shape, like a pilum of mortar, which is not too thick or too thin, and then it is paused on both sides of the patient; because it is placed on the top of the staff, and the patient stands according to its length, and then its limbs are extended with power, because the joint returns to its place with speed.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if the reduction of it is difficult because of all the reasons we have mentioned, then use this cure: and it is that you take a staff whose length is equal to two arms, and its width is four fingers, and whose thickness is adjusted so that it does not reach the rib from behind; and its form should be as follows:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	Then tie one end of the staff to the top of him, and let the other end rest on the ground, so that the staff does not slip from under the patient.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	Then tie one end of the staff to both sides of the rib of the patient, and let it extend up to the shoulder, and then secure the staff to the aide and the arm, and the extremity of the hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	Then let the arm rest on a step of a ladder according to its width, and let the hand be extended towards the ground, and let the other limb be suspended from behind, because the joint will return to its place with speed.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And with this instrument it is complete according to each way that you can imagine, and then, wait for the hair to dry; then put a plaster prepared of flour of moly and egg white on all the muscle, so that it hardens above it, and then tighten it from behind the rib with a strap, and let it hang, and do not lift the hand up towards the ribs; and the limb be turned over the plaster, and the arm be tied to its neck, and let it be wrapped, and do not tie the hand up towards the ribs for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	Then wait a few days for the patient to be comforted, because it is easier to recover from treatment.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	Then give a few more days, and then exercise his movements, and if it does not become softer, then it is healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	Maybe if the joint is dislocated due to moisture that occurs with it or because of another cause, then know that in such a case, three torches are administered according to what was said in the chapter on cauterization.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if this does not happen, and seven days pass without the limb being fixed in its place, then know that the nerve ends of the muscle, which are at the head of it, have been cut or stretched out or softened; and you will know that the joint has never returned to its place, and you will know that the limb is never fixed in its place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	From the dislocation of that which is made to the foot and the nipple or behind the joints, the reduction is done at a push and extended to the most, until it returns.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And be administered in that other constriction, and cure that within that it is healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if it happens that the healing is heavy on the member and the delay in its movement, then the patient uses hot water baths covered until that gravity is relieved and returns to the nature of it first.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter .xxvii.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	On the treatment for dislocation of the hip joint:
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	Know that the hip joint is dislocated with difficulty and seems to return with difficulty; and it is dislocated mainly at the front part of the hip joint, and the dislocation of it is not hidden from you as it causes pain when walking or standing, so that when you adjust the hip joint with the saw or touch it according to some shape, it is dislocated, and when you set it straight with the knee, it is clearly declared, because the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor touch the muscle of him.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And when you set the joints free, reduce the dislocation as soon as it comes to you with a cold cauterization, for if you come to it with a cold cauterization, the reduction is difficult and the cure is not completely done; and most so when it is at the back parts, because the pain of all other kinds of dislocations is worse, and the hot water baths are given as soon as possible.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And the restoration of it, when that is possible to reduce, it is that the hand of it is extended with two hands, and the arms of it are spread out, and the feet of it are placed on the hip joint and let it, and push the joint with the knuckles of his fingers or with the palm of his hand until it returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	More so if the dislocation is at the front parts, then return as soon as it touches with the knuckles of his hand or with the palm of his hand;
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not obey to the reduction, then administer very hot water with great force.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And that are two ministers who extend their arms, and have that bath of two ministers so that it is not re-dislocated before the extension.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	And return the arms to each other quickly, because it is wrapped in a long folded cloth over his hand, or just.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the member touches the joint with its hand, rub it with any oil so that those causes which help in lubricity of the joint are given with ease; and then push the joint with a strong push until it returns to its place.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	And the reduction of it is that it is placed on the paste in which there is rigor and constriction with blood of a hen, and is extended with constriction down, and the arm is suspended from the neck, and is left for some days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And then remove it; and if the joint is formed in its place, then remove the cloth of it and leave that.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see that the joint is not strong, then remove the paste and cloth, and leave that for some days until it is extended; and then remove it.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	More so if it happens that the reduction of the joint is with gravity, and its disposition is moving, then administer humidity in a bath and gentle friction, and compression, until it is relieved; or pause on the joint and let it rest, so is not moved by heavy movement; and leave that for a day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And then remove that, and put it in a bath; and when it is relaxed, then you rub the joint with gentle friction, and then repeat over that with a light movement, and the third time,
corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denolam intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	The corruption has already come about on the denouement of the bath, although it is limited.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you want, pause on that cow's fur, wet and sharp, with a strong hand over it; and make it a few times, because that is wet and reduces its disposition.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter.xxviii.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	On the treatment for dislocation of the collarbone: If it is a dislocation of that which is between the arms and the hand,
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	If the hand of a person has been dislocated, and the reduction of that is slight, and the opposite is true for other joints; however, it is necessary to be careful when reducing it in the first hour that it has been dislocated, before the aphumation or cauterization.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the reduction of that is that you pause the hip joint on a table with a minister's hand, and extends his hand, and the other minister pauses his hand or his palm on the edge of the joint, and pushes it until it returns to its place.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	However, if the palm is already placed on the navel of the hand, then the patient pauses his two hands on a table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is previous to that of the two hands, then the position of the hand is turned inside out on the table, so that the hand of the member rests on the edge of the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And if it returns quickly, then it is good; and otherwise, then administer hot water with aphumation, and leave that; and do not repeat it, because otherwise, it does not suffer or does not need the reduction of it for more than three days.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	However, the hip joint is second to its tortuosity; and there is no cause for the patient, except that the hand becomes soft and does not need to be strong for any cause; and you know that the nerves are delicate or twisted, and if it is not strengthened with cauterization near its cavity, then give it a strong cause.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	Then when it returns slowly, then pause on that paste which we have mentioned, and leave it and strengthen it for three days; and then remove it and exercise the hand.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	And if the movement of it is slow and happens that there is any gravity, then remove it with a cold water bath and gentle friction for some time until it is relieved.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter.xxix.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	On the treatment for dislocation of the hips: If you have a dislocation of one hip, treat it as described above; and if you have a dislocation of both hips at the same time, then reduce them with water baths and friction as much as possible until they are relieved.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Some joints are dislocated completely from the hip joint.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when any of these joints is dislocated from the two palms or navel of a person, then reduce it with strong hands until it returns to its place; and if you want, then administer aphumation in a bath for more relief.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	And then support the tip of that finger, and suspend it from the part where it is dislocated, and leave that for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	And then hang that up and extend it until it is completely extended in its place on the day after tomorrow.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when the night comes, then remove that with the same method as described above, and do not cease to loosen that on the day and exercise its movement, and remove it at night; and make that straight for some days until it is completely healed.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	Do the same to that, if it is dislocated at the navel of the hand, and remove that from its place and make the first operation with a strong hand until it is healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	Do the same to that when it is dislocated in other places as well.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter.xxx.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	On the treatment for dislocation of the spine of a person: If you have a dislocation of one spine, treat it as described above; and if you have a dislocation of both spines at the same time, then reduce them with water baths and friction as much as possible until they are relieved.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When any of the spine bones in the neck or back become completely dislocated and remain out of place, then there is no cure for the patient, since death looms over him.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	And from this it is that the excretion of the patient goes outside his will, and he cannot hold it; and some of his limbs or two legs or two arms or one of them; or one spine bone out of place, because the moved ones are four in number.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Therefore that one is already out at the back and is called gangrene.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	The cure for him is that you consider if the gangrene comes from putrefaction, because there is no cure or healing of it at all.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	But in that which is caused by a blow or a sound or similar to those, the Ancients have said many ways of cure with long words, of which the least returns with profit; I have already seen and opened up from that which is too little for him because of my proximity to his ear, at which I have made it calm and formed out of a different instrument than that on which I will show you and open it up.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And I say that in gangrene which happens from the back of the foot, there is no healing or cure for it; and similarly in that which happens to two feet.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And of those, there is no healing but only the one which happens to him from whom I have told you.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And it is that the patient be placed on his face above his chest near the wall, and that a wet instrument be placed under him to prevent the feet from touching the ground.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	Then a straight stick is placed, stuck in the ground at the foot of his head, and another behind his feet on the other side of the foot.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	The minister should hold the stick, and not place it in a hole; and another minister should hold the other one in that form.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	Then wrap the head of the patient and let the little chains touch his hair firmly; and extend the end of the chain to the stick which supports his head, and let that one hang on it; then tighten the other chain on his hips, and let the legs be held in this way; then adjust all the chains and let those ones hang on the other stick which supports his feet.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	Then the minister who holds the stick should throw it out to the end of the stick which supports his head, and the two sticks and chains of his limbs should not be removed or taken off from their places as I have said; but the minister must not hold them firmly in that way.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the doctor should place his palms on the spine with great force until he feels it vibrate, or that he places them on a table and tightens it on the feet until he returns.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	But if it does not return with this form, then take a table whose height or length is at a distance of three arms from the wall, and dig in the wall where I have said that there is a place for the end of the table.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	Then place the middle part of the table on the spine, and let the doctor place his feet on the other end, and tighten it well so that the spine vibrates and returns to its place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you want, open the door which is turned to the wall; and it is that you be on the ground with your head at the back of the foot two sticks, the length of which should be a palm, and let your head be in the back of the foot only two sticks; and it should be between each stick the length of a palm, and so should it be turned out through each stick that runs from it and returns to its place, and each one should be held fast on the ground so that it does not move.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And let there be a round stick in which is the door, and it should be turned to the two sticks of the foot; and it should be open from both ends of the two sticks.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at the end of him is a stick in which the stick is turned, whose length is a palm and with which it is opened; and in the other two sticks is similar to that one.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	Then tighten the chains that you have put on the feet of the patient in the stick which is meant for his head, and the chains that you have stretched in the surface of the foot; and tighten those same chains which you have stretched under the hips of the patient, and which are meant for his legs.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And it is that each side of the door be closed and that a minister twists the door by his hand, and the doctor places the spine as I have said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	This is the form of the door:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	Then when the spine returns to its place, and the location is covered up, then put a dry and smelly substance on it, and then cover; then place it over the table surface of which the height is three fingers or more, and whose length is an amount that reaches the location of gangrene, and above the spine.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	Then let him be held by the chains that we have spoken about, and feed him with subtle nutrition until he is healed.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if there is any imminence in the place at the end of the healing, then let him be given medicine that softens and cleanses him by means of the table for a long time, which we have recommended; and already has been administered there a plate of lead.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	In some cases, imminence in the back of the spine can be caused by dislocation; and it is that bone which you have already said because it will not cover that it should be done with this medicine, since it will make him very strong, so that death may come to him easily.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	Of the cure for a dislocated hip.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	You should know that the connection of the thigh and the connection of the muscle does not have any other dislocation except for that which happens in those parts with little movement and convexity.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the hip joint is dislocated in four ways, because it is dislocated from inside, or from outside, or from the front, or from behind.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	It is most often dislocated from inside, and less so from the front or from behind.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	And the dislocation of him to the inside is four times, when you adjust the hip of the patient with good medicine and he is healthier than before; and the patient cannot bend his leg because of the language which stops it from stopping, so that the head of the hernia comes here.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	And the sign of that which happens to him is from the outside, it is because the accidents of him are opposite to that accident.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	And the sign of that which happens to him at the front is because it spreads its hip according to the order, but the patient does not bend his leg and hurts more; and if it pierces from going forward and he cannot walk on it; and the urine of him is repressed and his hernia is inflamed, and his walking should be by the grass.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	And the sign of that which happens to him from behind is because it does not expand the side, and it does not bend the leg in front, so that it bends more than the other; and the hip is shorter than the other one, and the hernia is soft, and the head of the hernia is here.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	The reduction of the spices of this dislocation is that you consider, then, if the dislocation is old and ancient, which already has been overcome to it having that aprop you administer reduccion and Roman according to his disposition; then it is not in that cure for all; and therefore it does not cover that in that prosumpcion is made.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	May's in that one where the dislocation is recent, and it is one of the four spices of dislocation, then you cauterize it to turn back the joint and extend it to the inside and outside, and move it to the right and left, because strong returns it and does not need another cure.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	May's, if it does not return in this way, then you prepare minister strong and extend the bed of him from the part behind, or to his mas, or to lianment what is tied on the bed his denol; and other minister extends the hand of him above enayssi that it moves his mas behind the titillics of him; and aprop strengthen lianment lion on the root of the coccyx, and has another minister ters the extremitat of lianment.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And is extension of him or of the part behind to the angle to the part of the hipbone, or from the part behind to the part of the jaw.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And is the extension of all these in a veil within that the patient is elevated to his couch and that it remains hanging.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	This kind of extension is specific for all four cases.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And if the dislocation returns to water that we have said, is good; and otherwise, then it is necessary for all specific water that they say of the own cure.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of him own, when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is to the inside parts, you consider that the patient is raised on his back; and aprop place the lianments on the root of the coccyx in that place between the head of the coccyx and the place that is behind the angle to the upper part of the hipbone. And approve extend lianment in his above the part of the angle to the lower part of the hipbone.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And another minister strong takes the hand of him, and rips off the gross part of the coccyx patient and extends to the outside parts by violent extension because it returns to its own place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this specific cure is the least severe one with which that member is reduced compared to the other spices.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	May' if it is excused on you and does not obey to the entrance to this specific cure of all, then you consider that they are tied the two feet of the patient together with lianments strong and little, on the two talus bones and on the two denols.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And is the length of each one of its by the quantity of four said, and is the bed coccyx extended more than the other for a quantity of two said.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And you consider that the patient is suspended on its head and it is in the most; and is the length of him from the ground a quantity of two bras.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And you command to a young strong that he cuts off the head of the coccyx, and is suspended to him other young, and another young cuts down the coccyx with strength that it is tied up, because the joint returns to its own place quickly.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	May' in the reduction of itself, when it is dislocated to the outside part, you consider that the patient holds on his hand according to what we have said in the habit; and is strengthened lianment on the bed coccyx especially and on the feet of him.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And two sticks are placed, the one on the feet of him, and the other on his head; and two sticks are placed to adjust in the middle of the stick that it is fixed with which the patient is wrapped wrapped up so that the coccyx does not suffer from that the stick be between the thighs of him, so that the extension to the inside parts is not pulled.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And each minister extends to his part, and the doctor with his hand swallows the reduction according to the art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	And if you obey in reversal, is good much; and otherwise, it stops over that carefully and so which we have said in the wrapping up by that swallowing.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	May' you consider that the patient sleeps on his back quietly.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is to the front parts, then you consider that the bed is extended little by little, and it is according to this story on the stick; and the doctor pauses the palm of his right hand on the angle coccyx, and approves cuts that one with the other, and with that cut stops that extension to the front parts to the part of the jaw.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	And if the dislocation is to the back parts, then you consider that the coccyx is extended to the front parts, and it is elevated from the ground; taking into account that it stops over a hard thing, so that as the bed is dislocated to the outside parts, it is according to what we have said about the wrapping up of him on two sticks; and it is on its face and the lianments are extended, as we said, without turning.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And you consider that is administered compression on a table about the place where the joint is.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Then by the reduction is completed as you consider - and the sign of the reduction of him is not hidden from you, and it is that you extend two beds to the patient, and when you see those wrapped up and the patient pulls out his own bed and extends it in this way that the stick does not suffer in any part; and you apply a bandage on it so that the stick does not suffer by three days or four.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	And you remove the lianments and the bandage, and compare one bed to another.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	Then, if you see those wrapped up in your eyes only, then you know that the dislocation has been closed, and leave him lying down.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any cause of softening, then you return and bandage that one, and pulls out the other according to your first extension, and leaves that in three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	And you remove that one, then that one should walk slowly for some days, until it is comfortable.
Capitol .xxxii.	Capitol III.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	On the Cure of Dislocation from the Jaw
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The jaw is dislocated according to three ways because it is dislocated to the outside parts, and to the inside parts, and to the front parts; and to the back parts it is not dislocated.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	The sign of dislocation of him is that you order the patient to apply his bed to the coccyx; then you know that the jaw is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of all his ways is that you pass on the patient's right hand, in order that he has already extended his bed; then consider that it should be attached to his cheek with strength, and pause the foot of him between the two ties; and approve that one attaches the jaw of him to your palms, and those others are placed between the two ties over the patient's jaw with strength, and another minister extends its foot until he returns to its own place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	The sign of recovery of him is that his bed should attach itself to the coccyx with a non-laborious lever.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And you bandage that one and attach its bed to the coccyx, and approve those wrapped up with a bandage for three days or four; and then you remove them.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not use the bed for a few days, until it is healed and comfortable.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	If the reduction of him to you is excused, then administer very strongly the ingredients that are used in the treatment of the hand before the narration.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter .iii.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	Of the treatment of a dislocated shoulder.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The shoulder sometimes is relieved by small movement, and sometimes the dislocation takes place all at once; it is caused either from within or from without.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the sign of the dislocation of him is that sometimes the shoulder swells as a result of the dislocation.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	But the treatment of moving him is easy recovery; and it is that he is extended with ease to his side and is put back in its place so that he does not come out again.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	But in the treatment of him when he is dislocated all at once, cover that you do not make a cut on the right side, and have another minister who is strong and brave behind the two of them at the patient's feet.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	Then turn you to the right hand, the toe of the dominant foot, and to your left hand, the toe of the foot under the patient' head, in its place.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	Then turn you to the right foot, and to your left foot twice, then extend it to your left, and take up the feet of the patient with your right hand under their legs; then put them on their back.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	Then make two turns according to which you count.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	Then take up the feet at the third turn, and you are on the side of the cavity.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	So if he returns in one turn or in two according to this method, and if the foot comes back, it is good; but if not, then repeat the operation, for that returns again.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	But if it is forbidden to reduce him on the ground according to which we have spoken before, then place the bed on two legs on the ground; extend a mat on the ground, and place it between the thighs of the patient, and you have wrapped it up in the bed; so that he does not come out.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	Then the minister of him hold their thighs, and another minister extend the foot with its hands or with a pointed thing on its back; then another minister extends the foot to the leg or to the thigh, and the mat is placed between them; so that the hand does not come out, but that it may be held in position.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	Then the doctor absorbs the dislocation with his hands, and another minister holds the cushion on the side where it is needed; for the dislocation comes easily.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And when the dislocation comes back and it is announced to you that the reduction of him is accomplished, then apply very strongly, and bind the foot with a strong ligature to the leg.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	Then that you do not hurt or injure the nerves which are behind the shoulder, in order that the ligature may not be too tight and cut the blood supply to it.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	Then leave it for two or three days; then if the ligature is soft, take it off.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	Then remove it after three days, and do not walk in the cold air for four days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	But if it is necessary to move in front of that space, it is not certain that the dislocation does not come out and get worse, so that it cannot be treated; but take care.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if he swells up, then administer very strongly to him the ingredients that we have mentioned before in another place of treatment and healing; so that he is relieved.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter.iii.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	Of treatment of a dislocation of the toes.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	If the dislocated foot is held in its place with few movements, it is easy to move; but if not, then take care.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	But if the dislocation is in one of the two toes of the foot, then cover that you do not make a cut on the side of the patient' foot, and place it on a mat or table; so that he goes away as he walks.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	Then turn the patient to the side, and place the heel of the foot on the mat; so that he goes away as he walks; then take care that it does not come out of its place, and do not allow it to be moved; then see if it is held in position, and do not let it come out.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	Then place the sole of the foot on a table that can support it all, which has two legs, and extend it with strength and firmly for three days; then take care to remove it, and allow it to rest by walking in the cold air for four days; so that it does not come out, and is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter.v.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	Of the diseases of dislocation that are caused by plague or fracture or both.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When you find any of those causes, and if you are engaged in the treatment of that disease and the restoration of it, sometimes you find success, and sometimes not.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	But for the cure of him do not overestimate; but let another man who is wise in the art come slowly and mild; and do not use any medicine that causes swelling unless it is necessary, and leave the bed to the will of God; but if you hope to save a person from death, then use the medicine which softens it, and leave it to be judged by God.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	Then try to reduce him at the beginning of the disease, before it becomes fatal; but if it is not possible to do so, then leave it until the cause comes out.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	Then if the member returns as we have said before, then administer to it medicine which causes swelling and cure it with plague medicine; so that it may be cured of the plague.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	But if the dislocation is due to a fracture and you find that they are separated, then you should make them as close together as possible; and in that foot, only apply simple medicines of the sort which have been mentioned in the treatment of simple diseases.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	But protect and avoid according to your ability the instrument in the ways of danger as much as you can; for that is better to you than I, and remain in your glory, and praise your Lord, and hasten to your salvation at all times.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Thus ends the words of Al-Bucaasim which he has elaborately explained about the disease. May God be pleased with him!
Amen.	Te agradezco la traducion, y estoy a su disposicion para cualquier otra tarea que desee realizar. Adiós.
