Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Thus begins Al-Buqadi's discourse.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	O sons, I present to you this book, which is the last one in the science of medicine, by its completion, its consequences, its explanations and its explanations, it seems to me that I satisfy you with this treatise, which begins with the operation of hand, that is, surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	For the operation of hand is laid down in our region and at our time totally deprived, except that it greatly threatens the science of it, and its signs are left; and they would not be other than a few small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which have changed most and have led to error and confusion within that they are closed the explanations of it and is stretched the force of it and the art.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And it seems to me that I have revived that by the order of this treatise in that second way of explanation and declaration and abbreviation; and because it comes to the forms of instruments of cautery and other instruments of work, whether by addition of the declaration, and preparation thereof, which is necessary cause.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	And the reason that a good craftsman does not excel in his art in our time is because the art of medicine is long, and that he covers his actor before it has been practiced in the science of anatomy which discovers the joints within it; and the connection and separation of them; and the sense of bones, nerves, and ligaments, and their names, and the expansion of them; and the pulses of veins and quiet veins, and the places of their feeling.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And therefore I say that Hipocrates, who is called by a name, excels in the work that is small, and more so in the art of surgery.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	And we have already said of that in the introduction to this book; for whoever does not know that we have spoken of anatomy, it is clear that he falls into error and because many are formed in this science and get their knowledge from that one, which is the science of experiments and experiences.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	For I saw a doctor with an open book and tried to prove that he had made an incision of a scrofulous apostema in the neck of a woman, and cut some arteries of the neck so that blood flowed much from her, so that the woman died among her friends.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And I saw another doctor that he drank a stone from a man who had passed it in his state; the stone was large, and brought it to him, and dried up that stone with a piece of the bladder, so that that man died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And I have called me to draw out that stone, and I saw that by the size of the stone and the disposition of the patient, surely he will die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And I saw another doctor who took a fee of a duke from our land for surgery; and he put his patient on a black couch, and prepared the doctor with his ignorance, drew out the fracture on the skin, using powdices and needles to make strong tension, and did not leave the skin breathing.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	Then he took off the bandage according to his desires, and he prayed, and he removed the dressing by a few days, and commanded that we take off the ligament; and so, as it is, within that the wound and the foot were broken, and it came to harm.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And I was called me to remove the bandage, and I prepared myself to take off the dressing, and so did I get peace and ease of their pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	But the corruption was confirmed in the member, so I could not restrain that one, and did not walk because the corruption of the member was dangerous to the patient.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And I saw another doctor who pierced a cancerous pustule, and it turned to an ulcer near some days, within that the maliciousness of it increased with its lord.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	For the cause is because the cold cautery is pure of melancholic humor, therefore it does not cover that it comes to him with iron of anything, but that it is a member which suffers everything from it.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And therefore, sons, it is necessary to you that the operation of hand be divided into two operations: one in which the surgery is associated with life, and an action through which there is danger in its greatest dispositions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And I have already found this book in all places where the operation of hand is done, and not in any place where it is wrong or frightening; therefore it is necessary to you that you keep it shut and look at it, so that its pages do not prevent me from speaking and disturbing you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And therefore take your weapons in solicitude and protection of God, and your malignities in kindness and fastness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best way by the grace of God in order to achieve salvation and admirable succession, and leave behind your terrible malignities of difficult recovery, and retain your weapons from here that you do not fear them, so that it remains to your glory, and first of all in the world and after your sanctities.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	I already say in some of your monitions:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	"Do not treat a bad disease, so that you do not have to deal with bad doctors."
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And I have divided this book into three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Begin the division of the book and the first of the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter ordered from the head, in the forms of instruments and tools of cautery, and from that which is necessary in the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter, of sawing and piercing, and of vacuums, and of sucking up water, and of similar things to those, completely written and ordered according to the forms of instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	The division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter continues the division of the head: and the first of the fourth part; and you begin with the causes of illnesses by the same persons, and that it is not necessary to speak of the cause of illness; "the cure is escape". And therefore I say that I could not speak of the cause of the head in its part, but only of the cure for it.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	Of cautery by fire and by sharp medicine and recall of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	And there begins the discourse of all the book.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	For I say that the quality of the movements of that cautery and the noise of it, and in what combination they should not be used; and here begins the discussion of all the book.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Then I say that the speech of the quality of cauterization and its harm is long and prolix, subtil for science, and secretly hidden; and from it many wise men have spoken, and they have disagreed with each other, and to me it is enough a little of their sermons, fearing lengthening.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And I say that cauterization confers on the entire universal body, which is matter or substance, except for two complexes, which are complex of matter.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the complex of tail and dry matter will be separated; for some say that cauterization is beneficial to that, and others say the contrary of that, that cauterization is not convenient in a disease that is by nature and by dryness, for the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is not convenient that this complex of tail and dry matter that is wet and dry should be healed.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And he who says the contrary of that, that by cauterization is made health in all disease that is tail and dry that comes to the bodies of men, for when you compare the bodies of men with the wetness of fire, you find the body of man frizzed.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I say by the speech of that one, that experience has already discovered to me a few times.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	But however it does not cover that which has already been discovered and exercised in the chapter of cauterization through latter exercise, and knows the diversity of the bodies of men and the disposition of their diseases in different ways, and the causes of those, and the accidents of them, and the space of time of those.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	But in the other complexes, it is not over you fear, and more in the disease that are hot and wet, for all doctors have agreed on those, and they have not disagreed in the healing by cauterization in them.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And know, children, that of the secret of cure by fire cauterization and of its goodness, it is about cauterization with medicine burning, for the fire is simple, the application of which does not reach but to the member that is cauterized and does not harm the other member by the applied medicine, only a little damage.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	But the application of burning medicine reaches to that in the members who does not burn, and strongly brings about healing in the difficult-to-heal member and strongly hears it.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	But fire, by its subtlety and its substance's goodness, does not make the water flow but rather makes it overflow; And I have already known by experience and by the length of service in studying about the truth of causes; and by this water I am absolved from the length of speech because it is not understood in this pause to you hidden about fire, and the quality of the operation in the bodies and the expulsion of them through which are expelled diseases, with a philosophical speech, which would be clear in your minds.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And know, children, that they disagree about the time when it is convenient to make cauterization and pause the best time of spring.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	I say that cauterization is convenient at any time, so that the harm of the time's accident is submerged in the healing of water that cauterization draws it out, and more so if cauterization is for painful or necessary pains, strongly and quickly, those who do not suffer delay because those that come about harm are greater than a little damage coming by the time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And thus do not make it in your times, or children, water is not considered but the common people and foolish doctors, so that to that disease that is healed by cauterization is not convenient at all time, and pause that consequence.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the cause is not good as those who think by water, for cauterization is not but a place of medicine that alters the composition and dries up the humidity which is the cause from which come pains.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	But, however, cauterization that is redundant over medicine by the will of its value and virtue of its operation and greatness of its master.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	And it is possible that the disease return at any time of the day, according to the composition of the patient and the location of his disease, and virtue of it; and water that is prepared in the bodies of them by the addition of redundancies in it, and water that has come to them in their consumption of food and similar things of those causes; but if the disease for which cauterization is administered is a subtle disease in one member with few redundancies and humidities, then cauterization of a tooth for pain and similar to that, it is possible that in it does not return that pain, but it comes by little.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	But common speech is that cauterization is the last medicine, and it is a violent speech, not to water that they understand it, for I believe that it is not a cure which profit from medicine or from any other cause; cauterization.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the cause is opposite to that; and I say that cauterization is the last resort of medicine when we administer the methods of healing in some diseases, and those medicines do not benefit us, and then, at the end of the cause, we administer cauterization to it, and profit from it.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And then from here I say that cauterization is the last resort of medicine, not according to the speech which I understand from the common people and foolish doctors.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And they say that gold cauterization is better than iron cauterization, and they do not say this water but for the equality of gold and its subtlety.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they say that the place of cauterization does not burn, when water is absolutely vertue, for I have seen water burning and being burned by that which is not, but in some bodies is greater than others, and cauterization with fire is good and better than iron; but when you make cauterization with fire of gold, it is not known to you, because it is prepared to receive the heat, and if you place over it ignorance it will burn the gold by the fire, and case in the fire some blades so that the artisan sees for the occupation of that.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And for water it is made cauterization with iron very gently and then more gently to the rectitude of the operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have already ordered this chapter in cauterization according to other chapters, and I have ordered those of the within times, so that it answers your asking water that wants it.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	Of cauterization for headache by cold and humidity.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cauterization confers on humidity and cold about the accidental injury of which are two causes, so it is a cause of soda and many fluxes of rheumatics, called cursors, from the head to the parts of the neck and ears flowing, and many sleeping, and toothache and gualdiro, and generally of any disease that comes through coldness, thus also with paralysis, and sodo and apoplexio, and similar to those diseases.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cauterization is this: that you first command the patient who is evacuated by medicine that takes away the head, for three or four nights, according to whether you demand the virtue of the disease and the age of it and its custom.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then order him to shave his head with a razor, and then he will make points between your hands on a bench and place his hands on the feet of his master.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then pause the shave of your palm on the edge of the razor over the edge of the nose between the master's ears.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	Now, however, when the patient has been placed in position, mark the spot with the tip of your finger, and then heat the pointed cautery as follows:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	Then place that above the spot where the mark has been made, so that it descends, in a manner so that the patient's hand is gradually tightened, and you rotate that.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	Then remove your hand slightly and look at the spot, and if any part of the bone is visible, then raise your hand again, and if it has become cold, then do so with another tip, until you can no longer see the bone through it.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	Then take a little salt and dissolve that on the spot and leave it there for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	Then place over the affected area in the wound and leave it there until the scar of the fire is destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	Then heal the spot with the four-part ointment so that it is cured.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And they say that when the plague of Rome opened up, the more it was watered with milk, so that it is better and more refreshing.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And they say that the caustic should be applied to the bone, and that the cautery should burn part of the surface of the bone.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	Then let water be applied which is hot from the bone, and then heal it.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And others say that the cautery should reach the back of the bone, so that it pushes it forward with great effort within the bone, and this is how it is applied:
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	They recommend that the vapors of the head be inhaled from that spot.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And let the wound be kept open for a long time, and then heal it when it is healed over.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	However, I do not see these two kinds of cauterization as necessary, but rather, in certain cases for fear; and let that be done, indeed, if it is good for us, because the head becomes detached by a solution of continuity from the rest of the body, and even more so when the head of the patient is naturally detached.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the first kind of cauterization is better saved and more useful to me, and from that one I will make a work to save it.
Capitol segon.	Capitol Second.
Del cauteri del cap.	Of the cauterization of the head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When in the whole head chronic and long pain occurs, which persists for a long time in the patient, and uses iron, copper, lead, plaster, salt, castor oil, oil of poppy, and other things, and especially if it has been cauterized with another type of cautery that they describe and do not use, consider that since the head is of strong creation in its nature; and it is not pleasant and causes a great pain, then cauterize it with another type of cautery that they have just described.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	Then cauterize that on the tip of his head with the cautery so that the bone is broken.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Then cut the bone and reveal the amount that we have described and cauterize it with another tip at the back of the head in the place called vase, — which is the place where wind is breathed.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And let your hand move in this way, and do not reveal the bone, because by water the patient experiences great pain that is different from the pain of all the other types of head cauterization.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And I direct this type of cauterization to its place, for since the cautery with which the tips of the head and the occiput are cauterized is subtler than that with which the middle part of the head is cauterized; this is the way to do it.
Capitol ters.	Capitol Third.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	Of the cauterization of the empathic.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When a hard pain occurs at the back of the head or a pain within the ear, have the patient remove his head and administer another type of treatment, which I have described in the various diseases; and if it does not respond, then cauterize with two methods: either with burning medicine or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	Then cauterize with burning medicine, which you take in a little glass of ale, and burn it by scraping the ends of the arms with both hands.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	Then cut the spot where the pain is in the temple with a blade, so that the bone is not revealed, but leave a small space there, so that it is hidden.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	Then put a strong pressure on it with descent constriction, and leave it there for three hours; then remove the blade, and leave the wound open for two or three days, and then place over the affected area in the wound, so that it is not dry.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then heal that with ointment so that it is healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you wish, take some of the burning medicines I have written down in the two treatises on burning medicines.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	Then cauterize with iron according to this method: heat it so that the tip of the iron becomes red, and then place it on the affected area.
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	and is called a small claw, since the head has this form of a claw in which there is a curve, and in the middle part of it is a small protrusion.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	Then place over the spot where the pain is, and keep your hand away so that the iron is not heated, and turn the iron slowly with speed.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the amount of blood that is drawn by the surface of the bone is about half of what it usually is, then raise your hand so that the artery is not drawn, so that the flow does not go out.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then dip the blade in salt water and place it on the spot, and leave it there for three days; then dip a small blade in the margin, and heal that with ointment so that it is healed.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you wish, cauterize with the tip of the knife according to cauterization, and be careful not to cut into an artery in this type of empathic disease.
Capitol quart.	Capitol Fourth.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	Of cauterization of ancient empathic.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you treat empathic with water that we have described in the previous treatment, and with water that we have described in the various diseases of the head; and if the treatment does not respond, and sometimes by the head itself, which does not respond to the treatment, or only to a small part of it; then place the cut-off blade on the spot where the pain is, and make a line with the tip of the knife so that it is white, because this indicates the place where the pain has gone; then pause your hand for a moment, and then heat the iron so that it is red, and place it on the affected area.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, you must be careful that the Mandible does not continue to move, which disturbs the chewing, and that the tongue is not drawn out and the nerves are not affected, and do not make a spasmodic movement.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if you are careful about the flow of blood from the artery that is cut off, since when it comes to cutting the artery, there is a great danger, and more so at those where one does not know what it is doing; and then put the operation on hold at the beginning.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And I come back to the memory of the mistake of the flow of blood from the artery according to your way, in its place.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	If this type of disease does not respond to this type of cauterization and the patient can tolerate it; then cauterize that in the middle part of the head as we have described it, and heal the wound so that it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you see, administer the cautery which we have said in the chapter of stretching the bow string, this cautery has two points, and this is the best cauterization and more effective.
Capitol .v.	Chapter .v.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	On the cauterization of ear pains.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When there is pain in the ear and it is cured by moistening and by the other treatment which I have mentioned in the division, and if the pain does not go away, then apply the cauterization, and this is what is called puncturing, and its form is as follows:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	And then apply the puncturing near the ignition, and direct it towards the whole of the ear as well as a wheel is rotated, or in the circle of any essence if the pain is in any of them.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Along with the cauterization of the root of the ear, slowly and little by little as you see the place where it hurts, try to apply the cauterization.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the cauterization makes points all over the ear, and then it is cured, and then treat the areas within until they are well.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter .vi.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	On the cauterization of torture.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	The torture which is cured and the cauterization is not but of the spices which come by flux, according to what we have said in the divisions of the malignities.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cauterization of the spice which comes from dryness or spasm of the nerve.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you cure that kind of torture by jerks and capipurgies and gargarisms, and do not confer with your treatment, then cover that you cauterize the hernia with three cauterizations: first the root of the ear, second a small cut on the side, third the junction of two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And pause the small cauterization for the opposite of the bad departure, because softening does not happen but in the place which appears healthy.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	And the form of the cauterization is that you cauterize it on the right side of the extreme end of the ear, superior to a small point on the tip of the cap, and in the other (left), which should be according to the length of the said foot, and then pause your hand over so that the quantity of the spice of the juice is mixed with the rest.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the shape of the cauterization, and it is special of the knife, the shape of which is before you.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	But moreover slightly is that this one a little also it has; and cover that the knife in your left hand, a little of superfluous graciness.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the place with water which is before it is cured until it is well.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter  .vii.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	On the cauterization of ancient apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When ancient apoplexy is in one part with the malignities, and it does not have softening nor sensations of dryness, then cure it with water that we have mentioned, and do not confer with your treatment, and if there is no fever with the hernia, then cauterize that with four cauterizations: all over the tips of its head; also in a small cut on the side, as we have said; and in the throat.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the way of the cauterization is made according to what has been said.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And it is also cauterized on the mouth of the stomach; and then come again; and is cured by water which is given to drink.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter .viii.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	On the cauterization of oblivion, made by fire:
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	And that they are given to the hernia in the beginning of jerks and pills, making them spew.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	Then return the head of the hernia and place it on the jaw with plaster of Paris as described in the book of plasters.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And pause that a little looked at, because that is a way of cauterizing.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	Then give it according to that order which I have said.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And if it is well by that, then do not; but if it does not, then make the three cauterizations in the last part of its head, which are separated from the front-most part of the head to the back-most part of the head.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And between each cauterization the length of the foot, and then treat the cauterization with water which is done.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	But if you add more water to the hernia, then do not make the cauterization in the middle; and if you see more addicion, then cauterize it on the sides of its tips.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Then treat that which is well; and is the cauterization a little olive according to the form which has been given.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter  .ix.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	Of the treatment of paralysis and the softening of the entire body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	Cover that you process in the mongificatio of the head after I said; and then cut the head of the patient, and cauterize it at its own place on the head, and cauterize on all the corners of the head, and cauterize on the rear bone of the neck, and three cauteries on the spine of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the softening of the body of the patient and the patience are strong and the softening of the body is severe, then do four cauteries on the spine of the back, and immediately afterwards cauterize within so that it is intertwined with the cord as much as possible, and lift up the patient's hand.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	Then heal the wound in which he has been burned, and this be a cauterized olive tree.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	Of the treatment of epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	Is not cauterized the epileptic but that epilepsy is by phlegm.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And therefore cover that you process the patient' brain at the beginning with them and the other treatment which I have mentioned in the division where the patient is large and tolerant of the experience of medicines.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it is a child who does not endure the medicines, then administer gargles and make chewed on the servant who processes, before water by mouth for two or three days, with the benefit of food.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	Then cut the head of the patient, and cauterize it with one cautery at its own place on the head according to the previous way, and another cautery on the occipital bone of him, and on each corner of the head, seven cauteries.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is strong and tolerant, then cauterize it with the cauteries which I have said, having paraplegically and softening of the body on the spine of the neck and the spine of the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And be a cauterized olive tree according to what has preceded.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	Maybe if the patient is a child, then pause in cauterizing it subtly according to this way.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	Of the treatment of melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humidities and gross phlegm, then cauterize it with the cauteries which I have said in the paralysing.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is too much decrease leading to melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give him to drink water that softens the brain of him according to what has preceded in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	Then cut the head of the patient, and make a tortora made gently on it on the circle, and pause it at its own place on the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And the patient be sixty cauteries, and let him hold everything.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	Then pause linenment; and it is more worthy of a lamb's skin than of a sheep's.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And scald it on the fire by warm heat in measure, which he who suffers let him know when it is too much for him.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	Then leave that at its own place on the patient' head in the circle, and let it cool down.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And give him to drink water to the patient every week once, with another treatment of him that is healed; or if you want, cauterize it with very small points according to what is necessary for him, but keep the hand so ordered: this is a special kind of cautery which softens the brain by equality.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	Then pause that cautery made red on the border or in shades of purple.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	Of the treatment of descending water in the bowels.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When you have declared the beginning of water in the bowels by the signs which I have said in the division, then begin and give to drink to the patient water that softens his head, and keep away from all humidities.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And make that water bath in a vessel by day.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	Then order him to rub his head, and cauterize it with one cautery at its own place on the head; then cauterize it with two cauteries on two temperatures if it is the beginning of the discharge of water in two bowels, or the one-side-latched if it is the beginning of the discharge of water in a single bowel.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	And incise with one cautery all the veins and arteries which are left of the cord; and let the cauteries be in that length on the temperature.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And keep away from flowing blood when it is cauterized; and if the blood flows from him, then stop it with some medicine, which I shall give you, so that it is possible.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And bring me the extract of arnica, and hide those and avoid those which are the causes of blood; and be careful about the flowing blood.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	Some times it is cauterized in the neck between two bones with two cauteries produced immediately.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	Of the treatment of old tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When tears from the bowels are old and wet them well by the veins and arteries which are in the visible place of the head away, and is verified that there is too much watery phlegm, then cauterize it with one cautery which I have told in the beginning of the chapter of water in the bowels, and one cautery at its own place on the head, and two cauteries on two temperatures between the bones of the neck, and two cauteries between the bones of the neck.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if it is by addition, then cauterize it in its whole length from the corner of the eye towards the ear on the upper part of the cheek with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	Of the treatment of the foul smell of the nose.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you treat it with water as I have said in the division and do not prolong the treatment, then prepare it and give to drink to the patient three times a night; then cut the head of the patient, and cauterize it with half-a-crown's worth of olive oil.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	Then cauterize it with a small claw'worth on the two cheeks, leaving some hair on them.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And keep away from the fire that does not burn it.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	This is the form of the treatment of claw'worth.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	Of the treatment of softening the eyelids of the bowels.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the bowel is softened by sickness or humidity, then cauterize it with one cautery according to this cautery lunar; and this is the form of him:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you want, cauterize it on the two cheeks with a small amount of claw'worth and olive oil.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	Let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of the cheek.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	Do not press too much on your hand with the cauterizing, but according to the quantity that a third part of the eyelid is moved away.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	Of the treatment of the eyelids of the bowel when the hair is converted to the inside and turns the bowel inwardly.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the hair of the bowel is converted to the inside in such a way that it turns the bowel inwardly, then treat it according to two ways; either cauterize it or give him medicine with fire.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	And if it is cauterized by fire, order the patient to drink water which softens his hair in such a way that it is removed and kept in order; and if it turns inwardly, then strengthen the eyelids of the patient with some cloth so that he does not hurt himself inside; and if it is a nas-turn, then bind the eyelids of him with something so that they are not wounded.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	So he rises up and places his head between the patient's thighs and a servant sits on his chest, another one on his legs and another at the feet, holding the hands.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	Then place a cotton ball in an alum of the eye or a wet cotton wisp over the eyelid.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And then light the cautery, this is its form.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	Then cauterize the figure that you have outlined, little by little, until the surface of the nodule is burned away so that it appears like a leaf of mint, completely.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	The health of the procedure is that you see the eyelid of the eye already contracted and the eyebrows raised due to the puncture of the eyelid.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	So then raise your hand and place it on him for three days, and then light the cautery, this is its form.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then heal that with ointment so that it heals.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	Maybe if for some reason the hair falls out and the eyelid becomes soft again, then do the cauterization again all over.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	Maybe if the hair is on the eyelid, then cauterize that so that it rises to its natural place and is tucked in so that the eyebrows do not touch the eyelid.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	Maybe the cauterization is done with a medicine that burns so order the servant to pluck the hair where it is long and tucked in, and then make a cotton ball into an alum of mint leaf.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. .i., o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	Then dip it in a strong salt water solution and in a living worm. Here is the final line of the text: Here is the final line of the text:
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And then hold it on the medicine for a little while and do not let go until the servant feels the burning of the medicine, since the burning is in it.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	So then when the servant perceives that the medicine burns, then release the medicine and hold it on the patient's thigh; after it stops burning, then wash the medicine off with water; and then consider whether the eyelid has been raised in this way because it is washed away due to the contraction of the skin caused by the heat or cut, since it is good; and if not, then return to the medicine on the spot where there is no medicine left so that your operation is complete and the eyelid is lowered.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	Then place over it a border so that the nodule of the swelling is eradicated, and then heal that with ointment if it falls out or with another one until it heals.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	It is necessary for you to guard your operation with great vigilance so that the medicine does not fall into the eye, and if the eyelid becomes soft due to some cause of hair falling out and touching the eye, then repeat your medicine on that spot where the eyelid is soft, indeed, do it again from the beginning, and then turn it over so that it heals.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	This is the form of mint leaf.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And you know that the eyelids of men are different from each other according to their size and age, so your contraction is appropriate for each.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	Do not change the medicine for anyone who is studying this craft.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	Of Cauterization of the fistula which is in the eye's tear duct.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you treat the fistula with water which we have said in the division of the eyelids and do not confer your treatment, then cover it so that you cauterize that according to this way: order the servant to place his head between the patient' thighs, and hold his hair tightly from behind in such a way that he does not frown or move his head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	Then place a cotton ball infused with alum on the eyelid of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then light the cauterization which is this form:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	is shaped like a cane or a feather of an eagle, from one end which is made to be the cauterization.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you see it, go through to the other end.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you want it to be sharp like this.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	But nevertheless, that which is sharp is better for the work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	Then press the fistula if it is open, and draw out of it with a syringe and dry it out.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not open, then open it and extract the pus from it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	Then place over the cauterization which is well lit, and with the patient' hand a little away from the cauterization at the root of the nose so that your hand does not get burned or the servant disturbed, then place the cauterization on the edge of the eyelid and burn it out.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	So then if at the beginning of the eyelid's cauterization bone is broken, it is good; and if not, then repeat the cauterization a few times or twice, if necessary; and then leave that placed on him for three days, and then place over it a border and surround it with dried-out ointment so that it heals.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	Maybe if it has passed eleven days and it is not healed, then place over the medicine of sharp corruption so that the bone is discovered and shaved according to what is written in the chapter of its surgery.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	This is another way of cauterizing the fistula which they said at first: go to the site of the fistula and cut through it with a sharp knife and then place in that crack, thin as a hair, the amount of liquid lead; and then hold your hand well away from it, and do not let the lead reach the eyelid of the patient so that it does not cause pain for the servant, and cover it with a cotton ball infused with alum or water, since the lead adheres to its place and heals it miraculously.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	So if the fistula is healed with water which we have said about cauterization and treatment, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to administer a little through the nose and reduce the fistula to its root according to what comes out of its place.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	Of Cauterization of the wound which is in the hair of the forehead.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	The appearance of red spots and cracks on the lips, and mostly on those of children.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	So when you treat those cracks with water which we have said in the division of skin diseases and do not confer your treatment, then light the small knife according to this form which is carved out:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	Is shaped like a knife's blade.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Then place that carefully in those cracks so that the cauterization reaches their edge.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	Then heal that with cerums within which heals.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	Of Cauterization of the wound on the forehead.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When in the root of the uvula or on the palate or at the roots of the teeth there is an abscess which bursts, and then it is broken and crusted over, and then it becomes a fistula, and then you do not confer your treatment, then cover it so that the cauterization burns according to the quantity which is received in the fistula, and then place the burning cauterization on the edge of the fistula, and then hold your hand so that the hot iron reaches its edge; and at its end it makes a little burn, one time or twice; and then heal that with water which we have said about the treatment, so that it heals.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And so if the wound is severed and heals well, then it is good; but if not, it is necessary to uncover the site and clean out the rotten bone according to what comes in its chapter.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter .XX.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	On the Cauterization of Teeth and Softening of Veins.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the veins are softened by moisture and the teeth are loose, and you apply remedies to them and do not bind them, then place the cap of the patient on their thigh, and immediately ignite the cautery in the form that will come into contact, so that you place the tongs over the tooth and pierce it with the cautery quickly, and hold the jaw tightly with a little knot so that the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	And then remove your hand, and repeat the cauterization several times according to what you want.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	And then place the patient's mouth in a cup of salty water and keep it there for an hour, and afterwards, wash it out, for the loose tooth is tightened and the softened gum is hardened and the corrupting moisture is dried up.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter .XXI.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	On the Cauterization of Toothache.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When toothache is caused by cold, or it stings or burns, and does not respond to remedies applied with medicine, then cauterization is performed in two ways: with the help of a cow's milk or with fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Cauterization with Cow's Milk: You take cow's milk and boil it in a pot, and then immediately dip the part of the jaw where the toothache is into the hot milk, and hold it over the painful tooth quickly so that it steams.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And repeat this several times until the heat of fire reaches the root of the teeth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you see it, dip wool or a cloth in the milk above its root, and hold it over the painful tooth, and place a hot iron over the site where the root of the teeth is located.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	But the cauterization with fire is that you take care not to burn the patient' side where the toothache is, and that the thickness of the skin does not prevent the heat of fire from reaching the root of the teeth.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	And ignite the cautery in the form that will come into contact, and hold it over the tooth, and your hand within that the cauterization is completed; and make some preparations because the pain may return or on that day or the next day.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And so, because of the impression of that cauterization, the patient should fill his/her mouth with good milk and keep it for an hour and then wash it out; and this is the form of the cauterization.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And cauterize with whatever you can reach as is possible for you.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the form of the tube:
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter  .XXII.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	On the Cauterization of Extrophulus.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When extrophulus is made of slimy and fussy humors that do not respond to medicine and you see the digestive process of those slightly, then ignite the cauterization in the form that is this one, having two open ends so that fire reaches the other end, and hold it ignited over the abscess once, and another if you feel it necessary, as long as it reaches the root of the abscess.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the abscess is small, then hold the cauterization according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it for three days, and place it over a cloth in the form of a bandage so that the fire burns it up.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And then wash it with water and try to bind it and wrap it up so that it is healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And this is the form of the tube or two cauterizations as such:
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter .XXXIII.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	On the Cauterization of Sores and Constriction of Air.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When the humidities come up from the lungs, and mainly when the air is cold or of low temperature, then empty the patient first with laxative medicine, and then cauterize the root of the sore in the place where it is stuck.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And guard that you do not apply the cauterization to the throat or burn with fire the cord of the air, but a little bit only.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And cauterize that with another cauterization where the collarbone is located at the back of the spine.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	The order of cauterization should be as follows: first, empty the patient with laxatives; second, cauterize the root of the sore in the stuck place; third, cauterize where the collarbone is located at the back of the spine.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And then wash it with water that has preceded it so that it is healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter  .XXIX.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	On the Cauterization of Sores of the Lungs and Coughing.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	Cuando la tos y la mala respiración de los pulmones son causadas por humores fétidos y el paciente no tiene fiebre o tos, y es una mala respiración antigua, entonces cauterice ese con dos cauterizaciones en la furcula en las ubicaciones pegadas al hueso; y otra cauterización en el lugar medio del pie entre dos mamos; y sea la cauterización clavilh según la forma anterior.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you want, you can also have your cautery be made into points that are called puncta, the form of which is applied to the pain of the ears.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And make points within these holes; and then cure them with hot water that precedes within them, so that they are healed.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And now have three cauterizations, for the cauterization is made this way: from one you can make three cauterizations according to this form:
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter .XXV.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	Of Cauterization of the Titillium, which is the Head of the Ajutor.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the head of the ajutor is displaced by means of lubricating moisture and does not remain fixed in its return, you should reduce the displacement within it, and then, after a small movement, dislodge it so that it returns; for we have witnessed this, reduce the displacement initially, and then, on a small movement, dislodge it, so that it returns; and appropriately raise the tail, which is in the beginning of the titillium, to the posterior part, and raise the rope, which is at the beginning of the title, to the posterior part, with the help of your left hand.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And make two cauterizations that have two heads; and this is the form:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And then cauterize the cord within, so that it passes into one from the other part; and then you will see the figure of the cauterization, after three heads have been made.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	and then make them fine according to the quantity of trial; and this is the form:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And in some places it is adjusted according to that count, so that the cauterizations are.VIII.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And then place over the cauterization, on which salt is spread, and then make it adhere to the member with tranquility, so that it is not pained for any time until it has been comforted.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the displacement is to the posterior part and it returns, then cauterize on the muscle with a pointed cautery or a sharp cautery, because the joint is confirmed and the humidity is moistened and the intestine is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter  .XXVI.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	Of Cauterization of the Stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When the stomach is dripping and multiplies the humidities within it, and if you continue the methods of treatment and do not confer with them, then, when the intestine is placed on its back, raise its sides and extend them, and then cauterize it with three cauterizations: one cauterization leaves the foot open for a quantity of a digit in a cauterization that is sharp, and two cauterizations leave the sides of the two sides of the cauterization, so that the figure of the triangular cauterization comes out; and then make between those that are not adjusted, which will cause a crackling sound.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cauterization is according to the quantity of two thirds of the thickness of the cord.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And be the figure of the cauterization according to this form three additions, And if you want, cauterize with a large cauterization in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and this is a cauterization according to the form of a circle according to this form:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And the stomach is to be cauterized with a point on it that frightens you: and this is because you are aware of the stomach's pain according to the quantity that you want to make, then cauterize it with a point; and then cure it with a treatment that precedes within it so that it is healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter .XXVII.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	Of Cauterization of the Femur Joint.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When pain in the femur is caused by cold or humidity or by thick vapors within its normal configuration, and if you do not confer with it, then, when the intestine is placed on its back, so that it does not disturb the patient, three cauterizations are made according to this form, and this quantity of cauterization is applied above the femur from the hip joints, the hour that turns the bed of the patient.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And be the space between each cauterization according to the length of a digit, and be the cauterization according to the length of the right side of the body.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	Do not compress it with your hand while making the cauterizations.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the quantity of water that is applied is according to the majority of the thickness of the cord, and it is not adjusted; and if the intestine is placed on its feet; and if it does not remain so, then let it be laid down, which has already extended its coysas, and raise its brasses.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cauterization:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	You can also make these cauterizations with a sharp cauterization, when it is in your power and subtility and prudence in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And keep in mind that you do not process too much in the cauterization, and be applied to the thickness of all the cord so that it is applied to all the body and reaches within the budels, for the cord here is delicate; and know how to apply it.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter  .XXVIII.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	Of Piercing an Abscess in the Femur with Cauterization.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When an excision or abscess is caused in the femur, and you want to know if it is in the bone's meat or in its skin, if it is in the bone's meat, then the intestine is drawn with gravity and there is acute pain.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the skin of the femur, then the pain becomes great and often disturbs the joints.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Then, when the intestine is placed on its back, so that it does not disturb the patient's neck; and then feel the place of the abscess with your hand; and then cauterize it with one of those that is sharp, the shape of which has preceded in the previous page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And then cauterize it with one and within that all the cord is combined, so that it reaches the cipha, so that it is cured in a fire.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And then cure it with treatment of other abscesses so that it is healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	I do not know how to use this form of cauterization except for that which is mentioned in the art of medicine, and has experienced some good results by trying it out; but, however, it should be left alone, and this one is better.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter   .XXXIX.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	Of Cauterization of Wounds.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	They said that the small cauterizations of the scalpel to wound are made according to this method; and this is what you take from the small scalpel a long hair, and it is of the thickness of a digit.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	And then submerge it in oil and heat it with fire, and then cauterize it with a small cauterization at that place that is between the continuos of the furcula to the neck; and two small cauterizations are left on either side, a few drops lower down on the side that is cut, and two small cauterizations in that which is declining between the fifth rib and the chin, declining a little lower on the sides behind; and one small cauterization at the middle of the foot; and another on the stomach, and three small cauterizations on the sides behind; and one small cauterization at that place that is between the two shoulders, and two small cauterizations on the sides of the foot, left the small cauterization that is between the two shoulders.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And do not compress your hand while making the cauterizations; but rather, in the action of the cord' s work.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	Here is the translation of the text:
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	Nor is there any fear of this opening with the cautery; for often it happens in that place which is a fistula, and there is no cure.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter .iii.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	Of the Melting of the Meat.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you treat the disease of the meat with water, having already said concerning the treatment in the division and not conferring your treatment, then cauterize it with fire according to three ways, all of which are right; one is that you make three or four cauterizations or more according to the length of the meat according to the figure of the cauterization of the foot, the figure of which has preceded.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And between each cauterization there is a little bit of meat or less, and the manner of the cauterization is the same as we have said in the cauterization of the foot;
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not place your hand on the cauterization; and the hernia be placed on its back.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And another way to cauterize is that you ignite the cauterization having two sparks, which causes have said in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and raise the thread which is in the back of the meat so that it pierces the tendon of the hernia without hurting the patient.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And your elevation is made in such a way that you raise the thread according to the length of the body, so that the cauterizations are made according to the thickness of the flesh.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And place two sparks on each side, ignite the one, in that place where the thread enters from the other side.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	Then remove the cauterization; and there are four cauterizations.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you see this, cauterize with three sparks.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	Then cure the cauterization that has not been burned for many days, because it is more certain than other causes preceding in treatment.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	Of the Cauterization of Hydropicy.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cauterize not in hydropic disease but specifically in alcint.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you treat the hydropic disease with treatment that has been said in the division and not confer your treatment, then be aware that those who cauterize in four places around the navel and one on the stomach, and another on the foot, and another on the meat, and two between the spines of the back, and one on the right foot, and one on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the quantity of the depth of the cauterization is appropriate to the thickness of the thread.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	Then let the cauterization remain open that it gets burned for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And you do not evacuate the hernia during treatment by applying water to the cauterization so that two drops are added to it, and the third is spun; and this is done with the help of cure.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The form of the cauterization applied to the belly is clawed according to whether its previous form was flat or round; and this is the one with which the two sides are olive-shaped according to what precedes in its form.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter 32.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	Of the Cauterization of the Feet and Thighs.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are apostemated with hydropic disease and are full of watery urine, then cauterize the toes between the second and third metatarsal bone, lifting your hand with the cauterization and not returning it; for the watery urine will dry up.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	This is the form of the cauterization: And make two points on each thigh; in each one, a point is made at the end of the cautery knife.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And the cauterization according to the length of the thigh: and two points are made on the other side, and at the ends of the thigh; and two points on each thigh.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	Then leave the wound open for a long time treatment so that some urine is discharged from it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	Then cure it with those causes that I have said.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter 33.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	Of the Cauterization of the Belly.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When the belly is cut and moist with water that destroys the virtues contained within it, which are in the stomach and intestines, then treat it with treatment that has been said; and sometimes the patient suffers from a vertiginous cauterization, then cauterize it with a large cauterization on its back according to what precedes in the cauterization of the stomach, around the navel and four cauterizations on the circuit of the small intestine, one cauterization that is clawed; and one cauterization on the liver or two.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if the patient tolerates abundant moisture and water, then cauterize it on the pentel and the intestines, and strongly fix two cauterizations on the stomach and between the inguinas; for this is an excellent treatment to promote the healing of which there is no other remedy.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter 34.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	Of the Cauterization of Old Hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When the nature is of old hemorrhoids or a humor that is thick and moist with corrupt moisture, then it is cured by applying water that has been said in the division and not conferring your treatment, then cauterize with three cauterizations on the upper sides of the small spines of the back and on the little triangle that goes up to the ombelicus, and one above the ombelicus going down, and two between the spines of the back.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if you judge that the stomach is swollen and the diet is not digested, and the face sometimes becomes apostemated, then cauterize it on the stomach with a large cauterization according to what precedes; and one on the foot, and another on the meat of it with a clawed cauterization; and leave the cauterization open for some time, and cure it within that which is cured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter .xxxv.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	On cauterization of hernias, consider the removal of their contents.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you remove aths, then heat the cautery that is assembled at its tip.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Then enter this fire into this removed ath, and place your hand near that hole through which the blood flows out.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And make one cut or two, because if they are deep, then cauterize each of them according to what we have counted, and quickly treat those that are burned in their center so that they may be healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize a large cautery on top of the wound, it is better to delay it for a while.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter .xxxvi.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	On cauterization of fistulas that are formed naturally in the legs.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not obey the work that we have recommended at its place, and the patient is frightened by water, then heal with cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Therefore when there is a fistula in nature that comes out, and it is old, cure it with fire and corrupt moisture, and then water that is put on should be dry, so that it may not return to the place of the old fistula.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Then heat the cautery that seems like a flame.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And then enter this fire into this fistula, and according to the quantity in which it enters the tent.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And repeat on that fire as much of the corrumpted blood as one, two, or three times, according to the quantity of your need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And keep away from burning of nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes to the leg of the bladder or to the hernia, then keep away from all these places; and do not apply water unless the fistula is in a meaty place and you think it may penetrate.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	Then quickly treat those places so that they may be healed.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the place is sealed and the contents are removed from it, and it remains closed for a long time, then know that it has been completely healed.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the contents are not kept in the leg, then know that it is penetrating or corrupting the flesh in the pubic area, and that water from those causes will come out at its place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter  .xxxvii.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	On cauterization of the nose.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When the nostrils are painful due to cold or strong wind, and because of this the patient's breath is short, then heal with cautery on each nostril with a pointed cautery from which the memory returns.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And firmly cauterize the second with a small cut, so that three small lines of fire will come out, and then delay for a while longer.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter .xxxviii.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	On cauterization of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When a person experiences pain and softening of the bladder due to cold and moisture, so that the patient does not retain urine, then cauterize it in two places at its opening, starting with the left side, and cauterizing on the right side.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And make the length of each cautery according to the quantity of urine; and cauterize it with a cautery in two places at its lower end, or with two cauteries if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And do so with a pointed cautery as it passes through.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter  .xxxix.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	On cauterization of the largest one.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When the largest one experiences cold and moisture, so that it is prevented from becoming pregnant, and its menstrual blood is corrupted, and the time of its appearance is delayed, and then heal with cautery on a place near the navel, as we have said in the cauterization of the bladder; and with a cautery at the lower end of the two places, or with two cauteries, and with a pointed cautery.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter  .xl.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	On cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When moist air is spread on the ankle's opening, and because of this the ankle's joint is moved to its place, and it is noticed that the cushion is prolonged on the other side when compared with this one.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the dislocated place is turned toward the leg.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then heal the patient on the ankle' side with a cautery that seems like a flame, so that you do not feel the tent on the circle of the opening, and so that it may fall onto the leg' side.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And this is the cautery from which precedes the form in the cauterization of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	If you do not have this cautery, then heal it with three small cauteries on one large cautery.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And make the cautery according to the quantity of the bitterness of the whole juice; and quickly heal that which is inside.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter   .xli.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	On cauterization of the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain occurs in the ankle' opening, and because of this cold and moisture cause it, then heal the patient with water that we have mentioned, and do not apply it, for if you do, then old water will be made; then heat up a small cautery and pass it on that place.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And the way of the cautery in that place is according to two ways: or cauterize it with burning medicines, or cauterize it by fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	The second is that you cauterize it on the back' side of the leg with three triangles-shaped cauteries, and make them deep.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And space between each cautery according to the quantity of the thickness of the juice; and if the cautery is small or large.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	A few steps later, add a cautery on the middle of the leg to that place because it is four cauteries.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	If you wish, then cauterize it with a large circle that is passed over the dislocated leg' side, and burn all the bitterness of the juice.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	This is the way to cauterize in cytiqua when pain is attached to the ankle and does not extend within the cushion.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	And if it is extended within the cushion, then heal it with two cauteries on each side of the cushion where the leg is placed; and add a cautery over the joint for four small ones that are slightly painful.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if the cauterize is by cutting, and make the depth of the cautery according to the quantity of the bitterness of the juice.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the patient feels that pain is extended within the place of the leg' side, then heal it with a cautery where the pain extends for three points or four or more if you feel it from there.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the patient feels that pain is on the other side of the leg' joint, then heal it with a cautery by cutting.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And keep away from any cauterization that causes great pain or burning of nerves, and that may damage the leg' side; and do not apply water unless it is on the leg' side, and do not pour it out.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	You have already seen one of those, which I cauterized on the joint, and the last one in cauterization, and the fire blew up all over it, and burned it through and through.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	Then a great relief came to the stomach, and death followed soon after.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two parts together, then cauterize each according to this method.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And the wise ones said in the cauterization of water cautery from which this is the way: make a similar circle of iron, where the circuit is most of a palm; and is due to his orifice according to the thickness of a finger or two fingers.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And within that circle is another third; and is the quantity of the nail of the foot; and those circles are open from two parts; and the length of these pegs is one or two nails, and make in those margins of iron appropriately dressed in the circles; and this is the form of it:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Then set fire to it in the fire within so that it burns and gets sparks, and place it on the part of the water, the patient lying on his back.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And then cauterize that a three cauterizes rounded in one face.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then leave it for three days; then plaster that a with tar and leave the wound open for seven days; and then heal that a within.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Diys Al-Bubakis: O, son, of this species of cauterization we have few used for the terror of looking at it, and because there are few that look at him.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	More of the bloodletting cauterizations to him who suffered them, and turns back his attention to him.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	May cauterize with medicinal acids it is that you make two circles of a ring-shaped iron, where they should be the bolt of the door of iron; be the length of the part in the thickness of them are two nails or more of those.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the space is that quantity of the thickness of it; and are open from below and above, and are so they contain each other according to this form:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	And then place it on the part of the water, the patient lying on his back, and compress your hand over the part of the water; and take a little tail of water between two circles, and its quality is that of a small fire little by little, and let him suffer for the quantity of an hour, and bear the patient's bite and adhesion to it -- since such a bite does so when on fire -- until the adhesion ceases.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And then raise your hand to the instrument and wash off the tail of water from all the water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And then leave it for three days and place it on the border within so that the blackness of the adhesion remains fresh, and leave it for a few days, and run over it with a red-hot iron; this is last to heal.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then heal that a within fire.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain is spread within the cushion or the sole of the foot, make it standing on the surface that contains water according to how it was made in the water.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the way of tail of water, and I have already written that in the treatise of the correction of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Take of alkali and of a non-extended cause of both in one part a new wave of which the part is pierced by a small hole, according to the quantity that enters into it.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	Then suspend the base of the other wave waved, and gets over that alkali and alive cause of double water the quantity for one nail, and then you compress those with your hand by good compression, and leave the hole that sends away him from it into the wave that is suspended.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	Then adjust all that water, and get it over the other alive cause and another alkali, because that one in a strong way aggravates it, which is administered in the pills of medical operations and cauterization of the other members, since operation does by fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And then from some medicines those with which it is cauterized a few, thus quickly it is mixed and a sabored cause added to them so that they are mixed.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And Gualia recounted of a man the operation and cure with which he is healed of the pain of the ankle and sciatic vein, and magnified very much to be that, and said that there is no need for other cure, and because it is cured by one day so that it is healed, since it is fort of him, that intrec in a bath already known.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And it is that it is pressed of certain herbs, and if not it is shaken green, a little dried; and three times mixed with a little salt and placed on the water in which the pain is, or in the cushion, or in the sole of the foot, and left lying.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And it is left for the quantity of three hours, or for the quantity that the patient counts five times to be quiet.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And then put it in a bath, and when the body of him is heated, place it on the sole, since the pain ceases and is healed.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And you know that there is no need for anyone to cauterize with this medicine except by evacuating the body.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	May Ja Escorides also said that when the hole of a goat the vein is tightened, it is better; and the cauterization with it by this method: take wool and soak in old oil, and place it between the feet of the foot and between the toes.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And then take dry goat's hole and inflame that with fire within so that it is made of charcoal; and then place it on the wool and leave it until it is dried up.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And then repeat water, and does not cease to water within so that the feeling of the bite reaches the water in which the pain is repeated.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	This way of cauterization is called cauterization of cows.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter LII.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	On the Cauterization of Pain in Two Parts.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Some days pain is in the two parts by two causes, and if by injury or percussion or excessive evacuation, and similar to those, by infusion of rubbing material and wet.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And cauterization does not have any other special category than that which is made by infusion of rubbing material.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore, if the pain is in two parts together according to the latitude of the foot, then make pills with a third part, and add it to one of them so that each has half of the amount; since there are differences between patients' tolerances and the virtue of water.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And let it be made cauterization with a pointed cauterize.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, cauterize with three cauterizes or four in which the middle one is made according to this form:.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter LXII.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	On the Cauterization at the Beginning of Gilberness.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Moans witnessed in this sickness appear in small children; and the beginning of it is seen when a child's body grows taller than usual, with greater movement.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And feelers in the latter spinal segment of the back and of the neck begin to rise above the others.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And when you see this and want to stop it, then cauterize that which is pointed in this way:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	to take the cautery on all sides of the spinal segment.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you want, then cauterize around the spinal segment with a pointed cautery, two or three lines.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	Then make points close together.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	Then clean up the area well:
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	Keep in mind that the cautery should not be administered in a painful area caused by muscle spasms.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter .xliv.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	On Gout and Joint Pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And therefore, when gout is treated with a method of cure that does not cause further pain, then the cauterization that causes pain must be stopped.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And it is because you cauterize that which is an evacuation in the circuit of the foot's joint with a pointed cautery.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is the shape of it:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pain radiates within the neck or towards other joints, and this happens frequently: then cauterize each one of these three or four times in turn with this olive cautery.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if the number of these cauterizations is great for you: then cauterize it and do not press too hard with the cautery before doing so, only to surround the joint's skin.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pain radiates within the neck and back: then administer the cautery I mentioned in the previous chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pain only occurs in one place and is called sugar: then make points in the circuit of the fire as it revolves, making points in these two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if the pain remains in the legs: then make points on the circuit of the fire on each thigh and on the hand' s palm.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pain radiates towards the sides or towards the muscles: then cauterize each one of these on all sides of the limbs.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And do not evacuate bad habits or receive medicines properly: because if it is done well and the fire is extinguished with this cautery, God will help it.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter .xlv.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	On Broken Bones.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When there is a fracture in the pelvic bones and the intestines come out before the birth, and this begins to happen: then cover the patient with a blanket and let them rest, so that the wound does not open from the navel.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	Then follow the patient between your hands on their back, and order them to keep their back straight so that the uterus does not drop or emerge intestines.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	Then return it to the patient's side and hold it there with your hand, trying to break the bone at the top of the hip bone with the end that looks like a half-circle at the bottom of the spine.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is the shape of it:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	in a place where there is fire, and make points that cause fever and cause pain.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient' s thighs and placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	Then place the cautery on that mark with your hand, holding it straight, and take it inside so that you can reach the bone at the top of the hip bone in the middle of the back; and repeat this several times if you do not get it on the first try, moving to another point if necessary.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	Then observe with care during the cauterization that the intestine does not burn, so that there is no danger to the patient or any other great evil.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And you know that when you have bone with the cautery, do not continue your work.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	The cauterization of small children should be gentle according to their age and size.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	Then clean up the area of the cauterization for three days, keeping it free from dirt so that the fire does not spread there.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then clean up with water, so that it is cured.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	The patient should remain on their back for 30 days, keeping the area where the cauterization was done clean and free from infection.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	Then pause the patient' s nutrition according to the length of time for the treatment: that the uterus does not drop and the intestines do not burn due to effort at healing.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	Then when you want to take it away after 30 days, administer it well and keep it there for another 30 days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	It should be a matter of work and filling the stomach with food and drink: and fervently, because when one uses this complete method of cure, God will help it.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	Then view the cure for other fractures in the belly: and at the beginning, if you want to stop it, then cauterize that which is broken with a pointed cautery according to its quantity; and this is what is removed from the navel and back again: and clean up with water, so that it is not adjusted.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And others say that the first fracture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this shape, because it is marked by a half-circle:
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	And pause the line that runs through the length in the bottom of the half-circle, and another line above it; then place your hand on a pointed cautery, but first the first cauterization should be lighter and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter .xlix.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	On Twisting.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When the limbs are twisted due to a fall or hit: and the pain persists for a long time and does not respond to medication: then you should cauterize with a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	It is the cauterization of each limb according to its size and age, and its virtue and development: and its location and pain.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	Therefore, if after the first cauterization it is cured: then repeat it; but if not, then repeat the cauterization: because it is often the case that those pains are caused by punctures in that member that causes pain in another member; so that you can cure it with the cauterizations I mentioned.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter  .xlvii.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	On Leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Lepers are cured with a great amount of cauterization, and gently if the leper is infected by fire and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And if you want to cauterize it, consider whether the leper is infected with fire: and cure it with water that I mentioned in the division and not otherwise, neither does this harm nor does this harm cover all of it: then cauterize it on the head, at the middle place of the forehead, and at the second place on the left side, going to the front from the middle point of the hair; and both on the two corners; and one behind, on the back of the neck or serviz.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And finally place your hand over the cautery a little way in so that it seizes the bone with a small pressure and the scorching, so that the exhalation of thick vapors is relieved from him; and cauterize on the limb according to what is necessary.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if the leprosy is already widespread over the loins and clearly visible, then cover that you cauterize those cauterizes which we have said in the head; and on the nose, and on two cauterizes on the two testicles, and on two cauterizes on two spondils of the neck, and on four cauterizes on the spondils of the shoulder, and on one great above the shoulders, and on the collarbone, and on two on the hips, and on each hip, and on two on the knees and on one on the tendons of his leg; and cauterize that over all the joints of the said muscles and feet, and on each heel of his feet, and on the knuckles of their feet.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And keep away from the nerves which are above the tendon that you do not burn those.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	And some are cauterized with a cautery on the bone of the little finger and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the thigh.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And know that the more you apply cauterizes, the more it is relieved and confirmed; and know that the loins do not feel pain in cauterization, for as long as the blood vessels are not affected, so the body of him does not feel it.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And know that the cauterizes are great or few according to the limbs and joints according to what comes before with the spices of the instruments.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then clean the cauterize with flour of eru, and with honey, and with the other cure within so that it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter. XLVIII.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	Of Cauterization for Stupor.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When a member is stiffened or numb and is treated with medicine, oils, and ointments, and it does not heal, then you cauterize that stiffened member according to what it deserves whether the size of the member or its smallness.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And may this little cautery enter the essence of the rope a little way.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then clean that with oil within so that it is healed.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And some are cauterized with a certain stupor that extends to the head and feet, and to the spondyl of the neck, and to the eyes of the nerves that move that member, and the stupor returns.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	Do not add more than this unless you know about the anatomy of the limbs and the exit of the nerves throughout the entire body.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter. XLI.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	Of Cauterization for Scars that are deformities.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When old scars are ugly and do not conform to any of the medicines' ointments, then you cauterize that with a cautery a little way according to the essence of the rope within so that it is renewed white and the color of it, and the color of it is changed.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	Then clean that with flour of eru and lentil flour with olive oil rose and leaf of arnica, and a mixture of sage or yarrow, each in part and all mixed together, and return a cloth to the area within so that it is healed.
Capitol .l.	Chapter. I.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	Of Cauterization for Crani.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When cancer has begun and you want to cut off that arm, then cauterize it with a circular cautery in the direction of its rotation.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And the wise said that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in its location; but I have not seen it, for I think that it is ulcerated, and I have already seen it a few times.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And it is better that it should be cauterized in the direction of its movement with a circle as we have said, or a few cauterizes.
Capitol .li.	Chapter. II.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	Of Cauterization for Burned.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When it is burned by fire or injury and the flames, and it is painful and troublesome, then you cauterize that with a small circle of cauterization around the fire or injury, and the delay and trouble are removed. When a burn is delayed in maturity, either because of excess fat making it late, or age making it old in decay, and time causing it to mature quickly, then cauterize it with small pointed cauterizes; and let it lie for those who want to hurry its maturity.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	But if you want the piercing of it with cauterization, then you light that cauterize from which this is the form of it: and leave it in the middle of the burn location within so that it penetrates.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the cauterize in that place is left behind, so that the body of the arm is relieved; and clean that within so that it is healed.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter. II.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	Of Cauterization for Corrosion.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corrodent is walking corruption in the limb, which corrupts that as if it were eating dry wood with fire.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore if that corrupter is in a place where it suffers cauterization with fire, then you light cauterizes small and pointed, and large according to what is appropriate in the place where it is corrupted.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	Then clean that completely within so that you remove all corrosion and do not cause further corruption from it.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	Then leave that alone for three days, and let it stand with the cauterized areas dried up within so that the scars are completely eradicated and all corruption is gone.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	Then clean that with ointments of pregnancy.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	But if after three days the meat is born healthy where there is no corruption, then it is good; but if not, then repeat the cauterization on that which is rotted in the areas of corruption.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	Corrodent is treated sometimes with sharp medicine, for that is half a place instead of cauterization.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	But yet cauterization with fire is much more useful.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And I have already said that the cure for it is sharp medicine in division, and now take that when you need it urgently.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter. III.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	Of Cauterization for Claws and the Others.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	A few times the claw of the leg becomes damaged and is called claw, and it is a gross cause, causing the leg to limp; and cauterize those two ways, either with fire cauterization or water cauterization.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	But yet cauterize with fire is that you ignite the cauterization as if it were a light, which is done from iron according to how much it contains the claw in all parts, and be of fine edges.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	Then let that ignite on the claw, and return your hand to the cauterization in the direction of the claw within so that the cauterization reaches its depth.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	And leave it for three days until it begins to burn a brac.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	Then apply a paste of dried wild mallows, cut into strips and soaked in salt, to it for a night, because it will remove the roots.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And then clean the wound with a poultice of fresh meat extract until it is healed.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if they don't turn black and there is a small blister on the surface of the body, mostly on the feet, then you will treat it with fire; because you have taken a little piece of hair or iron or stone from a volley, and place it on the knuckle; then pour a small amount of water on the piece, cover your hand, and turn it over so that the water drips onto the blister; and wait an hour for the water to cool off at the root of the finger nail; then remove it, because the nail will fall out.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And in this way treat all of them one by one until they are all healed.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And then clean the blisters that the roots of the fingers have been removed with water from the poultices that the meat has generated.
Capitol .liiii.	Chapter III.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	On Gout.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When there is a feverish tremor due to friction in the nerves or due to some other similar cause, then you will treat it by applying four different cauterizations or five on the joints of the feet, one cauterization between each joint; and one cauterization on the feet, and another on the stomach, and another with an olive.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And this tremor will cease and the recovery from the fever will speed up.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter L.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	On accidental wounds in the body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When there are raw wounds in the body, and pustules are formed which are filled with thick corrupted matter; then at first sight, treat it with a very slight cauterization on the entire length of the fistula with an iron rod, the end of which is heated; or with a long chisel; or with a slow cauterization.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And some blisters are opened at the beginning of their discharge according to this way; and they do not become infected, and the fluid is eliminated without pain, and they heal from them.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	But nevertheless, when there is a lot of fluid, it should be evacuated with bleeding.
Capitol lvi.	Chapter LVI.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	On the flow of blood due to the incision of an artery.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Too much blood flow due to a wound or an incision in the limb; or because of the rupture of a vessel, and it is difficult to stop it.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Then take care to tie the artery with your hand at its orifice, and place your thumb over it to stop the flow of blood below the knot, and not let it drip.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	Then apply a few large and slow burning olive cauterizations to it, and blow over them until they are set on fire.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	Then take care to apply the same cauterization quickly to the place where the artery has burst; and if you should die before you can stop the flow of blood, then treat it with a rapid cauterization until you stop the bleeding.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the blood flows out of the artery's orifice while you are tying it up and the cauterization is burning; then take care to apply another cauterization quickly to the place where the blood is escaping, before you stop the bleeding.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And be careful not to burn the nerve here; and that it does not affect the patient with any other evil.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And you should know that when the artery bleeds, it is not possible to stop the bleeding by tying it up, and certainly not when the artery is large; if you tie it up, the extremities will burn and the blood will be stopped with pain, or you will stretch it too much, or it will be held with a cord or a thread tightly, or it will be laid on medicine that stops the bleeding of the wound; and they are stretched by means of a pillow.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	But that which is administered with a thread or a string tightly, and burned by means of medicine or similar causes, does not succeed very well.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	But if there is a little blood here, and no medicine or remedy is present, then open the knot of the thread above the orifice of that vein as we have said, and understand well the great constriction of it within the body when the pulse is strong; and over the artery pour cold water with a large degree of coldness until the blood is congealed and thickened; and sew with sutures where you need to cauterize or apply medicine.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Chapter LII.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	On Incisions, Punctuations, and Bleedings, and on Bleeding and Plagues, and their Similarities.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are words of Avicenna.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have spoken in the first chapter about all the diseases that are treated with fire and medicine that burns, and the occasions and causes of them, and the instruments which are necessary for the shapes of the cauterizations; and we have arranged the chapters of the sub-header of the head within the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And we will continue in this chapter to arrange them for those who want them, so that they may find what they seek.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And in advance of me, know that, for terror, what I have spoken about in the first chapter of cauterization is sufficient.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And for the body that is in great danger, because in the operation described in this chapter there is a blister due to blood flowing from a vein or incision on an abscess or opening of an ulcer or plucking out a箭or from the flesh or cutting with a hook and similar things;
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And all of them are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in addition to them there is danger of death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I warn you that, upon yourself, not such a thing should fall, because some wounds may fall into your hands in ways which are difficult to treat; and there are some diseases that are difficult to heal.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And some of them are so difficult that they will end in death if not treated quickly; and because of the length of their illness, and because of the difficulty of the disease itself.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And those are the ones that give you hope and happiness, while waiting for the healing of that person, but his disease is destructive.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And do not consent that someone come to you in this way; and your caution should be greater than your fear and your haste; and do not assume any cause about him except a certain knowledge which certifies it to you; and to whom success is blessed.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And use in the treatment of all your diseases by prediction and indication; for in this is the saving of your life, because it helps you to gain fame and memory, honor and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Or children, God in you inspire understanding; do not seek his direction or protection, because it is in his hand.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have arranged this chapter differently, according to the chapters that precede it in the chapter of cauterizations, from the cure of the head within the feet, so that it may please you; and from what you seek, and by which you needed to be treated.
Capitol primier.	Chapter one.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	Of the treatment of water which is contained in the head of children.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	Do you know that this illness can be seen in children from birth, and when the newborn child has his head lifted up.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And some are hidden due to a hidden cause which is not known.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	I have only seen this disease in children; and in all those whom I saw it appeared as if they were going to die, and so did it seem to me a useless work in them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I have seen a child whose head was filled with water, and his head always remained swollen until he could not bear it on account of the great size of his head, and more because the moisture increased within him so as to cause death.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this moisture, or is added between the cheek and the jaw, or is added below the jaw over the chin.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	If the operation is done in such a way that the moisture is between the cheek and the jaw, and the swelling is little, then you should cut a hole in the middle of the head, and if the length of the hole is two fingers within, it will allow the moisture to run, and this is the form of the sponge.
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And if the moisture is increased, and the swelling is greater, then there are two holes according to this way of doing it:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the moisture is below the jaw, it is a sign that you should open the opening of the head completely, and squeeze out the water when you compress it from within; and do not let it be hidden from you.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	Then you should cut in the middle of the head, according to this way of doing it, with three holes:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And then let the whole moisture out; and then strengthen the holes with drapes and down; and then pour water from above on it, on the fifth day, and then wash the limbs and cure the pain with poultices and ointments, and strengthen the head with equality; and feed the patient with dry food of little moisture so that the member is comforted and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And there is another way of incision which you consider according to the size of the swelling and the collection of water; because some are greater in the back, or at the front, or on the right hand side, or on the left; so then deal with the incision where the swelling appears and the water collects, and pour out according to what is possible for you.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that you do not cut the artery, and allow the blood to flow away from the body, because this flow of blood can cause death for the patient from the escape of blood due to injury.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter 2.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	Of incision of the arteries which are near the ears, called carotid arteries.
Capitol segon.	Chapter two.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When there is a wound in the lungs or in the feet, and it is very old, and do not apply medicine to it; then the last cure is done by incision of those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And then when you want to cut the head of the patient, and rub the area with rough cloth that it appears the veins, and strongly secure the neck of the patient with some cloth; and consider where the pulse is; and the places which are near to those in front of the ears are pricked, and covered except in a few men.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And then look at the vein, and try to cut each one with a sponge, entering it into the bone through the hole made by the incision, and do so according to the length of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you want to, introduce the sponge below the artery, and cut it with incision at the opening towards the back.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And the length of the incision is divided into two parts; because when any vein is cut with a pulsating pulse, it will break out from the incision very soon, and that will cause pain frequently.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	Maybe if the vein does not appear on feeling, then you should measure the quantity of the space from three fingers; and then look at it with an attempt, and cut into the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And here is the quantity of a palm. and it is firm in the grasp of him who grasps it most often, and all of this is according to the quantity which appears from the virtue of the patient and the swelling of the vein.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then look at the disease; and if there is a cause of the swelling in the jaw, you should cut it according to what is necessary, and do not let it cause swelling.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen the disease with down and linen cloth; and then cure it with poultices until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter 3.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	Of the extraction of veins which are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When there is a movement of the brain or a catarrh due to alcoholic drinks and due to quality in the membranes of the temples, or it appears violent and similar to those, and it is treated with medicine, and you do not confer with it; then we are concerned with these diseases by extracting the veins from the temples, and cauterizing those as shown above.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the way of operation and extraction of these is that the patient rubs the skin where the vein appears, because it is shown by his pulse, and it is hidden except in a few men due to its speed.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden from you, then the neck of the patient be strongly secured with some cloth; and rub the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the place with water until the vein appears visibly to you.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	Then you take the sponge in this way:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then you should cut the cheek with ease until you reach the vein; and then you take it from one side, and extract it at its ends, until you discover the vein of the tunic which is left behind, completely.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	Maybe if the artery is thin, you should wrap it with a thread at its end, and then cut it from one side according to the length of the limbs on both sides, and do not allow blood to flow because if it is not cut, the blood will not flow.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And then empty the blood from a palm. Inside three.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	If the vein is large, then you should secure it with two strong threads of cotton or string, and do not let it be broken before the consolidation of the disease, and allow blood to flow from it.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And then you should cut the surplus that is between two ligaments; and make it in that hour or at another time.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you want to, cauterize it with fire within the bone at the end of the limb, and do so in the place where the vein was cut, and keep that place as it is.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And the best work is that of the patient having fever or being in a hot state; because cauterization is of those causes that help to dry up the moisture, and so on.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then extract the veins that rub the place where the cut is made, and make them rest on a fine powder of salt gently, and then cure it with dry medicines by making the flesh and the blood dry within, so that it may be healed.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	If, while you are opening another vein which is causing blood to flow from the artery, then you should stop it from flowing by cauterizing or pressing it, and strengthen your hand within so that it does not flow with blood.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if for some reason that is not present here, then pause the small child on the spot before it is glistened, and place the spot with very cold water of intense coldness until the acute pain stops, and is strengthened as much as possible.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And the water that is put out with an iron bar is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two blades, because you have sent the two places with this cautery, and pause each one, lighting it up, until they reach the bone and cut the vein in two places, so that the water can be drawn between the extremities of him, for they are not consolidated altogether from this cautery.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cauterizer:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And the acute edge of the two blades is.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	However, if there are smaller edges than two blades, because if they are sharp with only two blades, and do not cut the flesh with speed.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore, in those where there is some thickness, the fire's heat must be kept on it, and the flesh is gently separated.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this work is better than all works and lighter.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And the space between the two blades is the quantity of the thickness of it.
Capitol quart.	It will take four.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	Of the treatment for acute and acidic wounds of the feet.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When the acidic tears are and those veins that pass over the top of the head do not respond to any treatment of medicine, and often the face of the patient becomes red and it feels as if it is burning with ants, and the feet of him become exhausted, dampening their skin so much that they become rough, and the eyelids are scraped by the acute edge of the tears, and these tears are not suitable for this operation, and they do not respond to treatment with spitting.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And it is that you order the servant to quickly shave the hair from the forehead, and make three cuts in the forehead evenly spaced according to its length.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the cut falls two times: the first cut is evenly spaced according to the length of the nose in the middle place of the forehead, and the second cut is according to the length a small distance from the movement of the eyelids that are in the tear, and the third cut is on the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And keep away from the beginning of the arteries that are in two places, and extend your hand from the continuation of both jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space between each cut is a third of a yard long.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a sponge-like stick or dry cloth that dries the wound quickly.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	Then put the stick of two sharp extremities, and this is the form of the cut:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	that it starts from the temple and continues to the second cut.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Examine the whole bone that is between two cuts, which is over the bone itself, and then make a small cut in the middle of it until it reaches the second cut.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	Then strike the stick and enter into the first cut another time, or an instrument is called a scalpel, taken from one side and not sharp on the other side.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And pause the jaw of him from above the bone, and the bar from below it, and make a small cut in the middle, and separate all the vessels that descend from the head to the feet.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	However, if the cut continues from the bone and makes a small cut in the middle of it, then make another cut in the middle of it until it reaches the other cut.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And because it runs from the bone with a certain quantity of blood, squeeze the places of the feet of the dry wound.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	Then pause in each cut a small piece of cloth, and pause over them dirty rags that are wet and greasy, and wipe that does not cause a poultice with blood.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day remove the bandage and administer a great infusion of cold water, and then treat it with oil and rosewater and other things until the scabs are healed.
Capitol .v.	It will take four days.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	Of the treatment for acute and chronic wounds that descend from the temples inside the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When blood comes out with pain and continues to flow, often the feet of the patient become very tired, their eyelids are swollen and scarred, and because of the severe pain in the scalp, and the loss of hair is common, and because the eyes have a cloudy appearance, these wounds are not suitable for treatment with water alone, or for treatment with oil and other things.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best treatment for these wounds is this: that you order the servant to shave the forehead, and make a cut in the middle place of the forehead, a small distance from the edge of the eyelids, and it should be on the bone; and extend your hand from the continuation of both jaws, until it reaches the exposed bone.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry all the blood with a sponge or dry cloth, and then fill the gap between the two lips of the wound with a small piece of cloth or a patch of linen.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	Then wipe away any dirty rags that are wet with oil and vinegar, so that it does not cause a poultice with blood.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when the wound has healed and the pus has decreased, then you will take flour from two pieces of wheat and four pieces of colophony and mix it together, and make a paste out of it, and administer it to these wounds in the form of an ointment made from native ingredients.
Capitol .vi.	It will take six days.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	Of the treatment for blood that comes out in the ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	All causes that come out in the ears are of four kinds, because either it is mineral stone or similar to it, because of iron and lead, or it is plant-like, because of cedar or favar, or it is fluid-like, because of water and vinegar and similar things, or some animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And when mineral stone comes out in the ear or a similar cause to those causes that are not true, then pause the ear on the shoulder, and if the stone is moved, then distil it with olive oil or vinegar, and then administer the infusion of it, and make him sneeze at the time of application, and wipe his nose with a cloth.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	Then pause the circuit of the ear with some cloth or wool, and stretch out the ear because it is bruised in these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not bruised, then administer the infusion with the instrument called an epiceratic needle, whose form is this:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it is bruised with the needle, then it is good; otherwise, administer the infusion with a quarter of a teaspoon of doubled oil.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And if it is not bruised with water, then make a tube of metal and insert the end of the tube into the ear canal and cover its opening with wax and softened oil so that it is not too much but only as much as necessary for the tube to stay in place.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	Then remove it with a strong grip, because three times have been counted with water that has been described.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	However, if it is not bruised in this way, then take a silver ring or an old ring, and place a small quantity of the cloth between the teeth, and pause it on the side of the ear with a mild grip; then make a small cut at the end of the ring with a sharp blade.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And approach this to the ear with ease, and dry the ear from moisture.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And so if it is not caused by a furunculous infection due to all the causes that we have mentioned, then you should cut off the part that would cause an abscess or spasm.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the way to cut that out is that you should first mark the vein with a blade and extrude it out second by the method of virtue, and then approach your knife between your hands and separate the ear from its base, and make a small incision in the root of the ear which should be greased with oil in the area to be pricked gently.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And the incision should be in the shape of the moon so that it reaches the ear-drum, and if the ear-drum is burst, stop it with an appropriate instrument; then sew up the incision quickly and heal that inside so that it may be cured.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause is a fluid that builds up and inflates the ear, then administer treatment and extract it; but if you do not comply with his advice and insist on your own, then you should take a thin thread according to this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	and administer the extraction of that fluid which is stuck in the ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not pour water when you think that the ear is already moist with vapor from the ear, and place it in a bowl of water, and extract it gently or cut it off as we have said before, for it is convenient to extract it in this way.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	But in water that is entered into the ear, it should be that the patient uses a sneeze at the beginning, and fill his own ear with a little old wine, and beat over that ear by which water comes out, and if it is caused by a furunculous infection, then it is good; and if not, then take two very small peasy peas according to its length, and tie them together, and the patient should put one of them into his ear and jump over it with the other one on that part from which water comes out.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	So do not stop pouring water until all the water has been discharged.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc .i., e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And when the water is completely discharged, then you should take paper or a piece of cloth  . i . , and place one end of it in the ear and extend the other end towards the fire until it burns completely.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And then take another piece of cloth and pour water repeatedly until all the water is discharged, and insert it with a cannula as we have said before as an ear-drummer.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	But in the extraction of beasts that enter into that ear, if it is a small thing, then push and pull gently as we have said in the division; but if it is a large thing which causes pain to the head of the person, then administer extraction with a sharp object and a cut, and the cause of it is lighter than all the other causes that are caused by the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	But in the extraction of a vermen that is generated in the ear, when you administer to it with water as we have said in the division and in the treatise on distillation, and if you do not comply with your treatment, then you should keep the ear to the sun.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if there is any cause of worms here, then extract it with a sharp object or a sharp tool, but if there is no cause, then take a narrow cannula that is curved and wide at the end from which it comes out:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And introduce the narrow end into the ear according to its quantity because it suffers from that malady; and draw it out with a strong suction, and pour water repeatedly, so that all the worms are discharged.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	But if you do not comply with my advice to go out, then you should try to close the canal with wax as we have said before; and then administer distillation as has been described for the cure of worms, and see water in the treatment of distillation.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And may your effusion be with which you pour medicinal oils into the ear with this instrument, of which this is the form of it:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And make it of silver or brass, wide at the end, in the shape of a small tube, and smooth it on the top.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	Then, if you want to put it into the concave part of the cannula from which you pour liquid medicine, then do so.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you want, take the wire and wrap it around the end of the cannula gently, and pour oil or juice from any herb, or water that you want of these medicines into the cannula - which is in the ear -, and then insert the wire with a little pressure onto it, and squeeze your hand slightly to force the oil out into the concave part of the ear, and let the patient feel the oil inside;
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And water that is already poured into the ear is also burned slightly by the fire.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And keep in mind that the cause which you will distillate in the ear should not be too dry, because ear medicines do not tolerate such water.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	Of the Treatment of Ear Aches.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Some small children are born with an obstruction in their ears, which does not perforate them; and water already exists in some adults, causing pain in the middle part of the ear, and in some cases, it is in the outer parts.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And that which happens in the middle part of the ear, which does not comprehend the head, is in difficult cases of treatment.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in that which you are able to feel the head, then keep the ear of the patient to the sun and look at it.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if there is any obstruction apparent, open that with a sharp object which has a slightly curved end:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the end of it is small in length, of which one part is sharp and the other is not; and the blade is two little blunt to avoid injury to the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And if the obstruction is due to hidden meat in the ear or in the middle part of it, then cut it out with a sharp object and do so with great care that all the meat be removed.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the obstruction is in the middle part of the ear, then take a thin wire and burn it slightly with fire, and place that in the middle part of the ear.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And if you have perceived any obstruction by water which the patient perceives with ease, then try to press it gently; and keep in mind that you do not injure the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then place a thin piece of lead in the ear according to the size of the tube which you have wrapped in wax with olive oil; and do so for several days until it is certain that the ache has been cured; or take some fresh lead and wrap it in cerot that is made of rosin, and place it on the affected part, and let it cool; and then cure that inside so that it may be healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	May it be that the blood flows out, then dip the sponge or cloth in water and place it over the ear, and use the other treatment which constricts the flow of blood, which is said in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter .viii.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	Of the cure for blindness, which is given by applying to the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	The athesil that should be applied to the eyelids of the patient has two kinds, some are wet and some dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Therefore, if you have such herbs as marjoram or mint, and chop them up, then apply them to the affected areas, and place a bandage over them, folded three times.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	May it be that pain comes from a flow of blood, then you should cauterize those with the subtle causticum.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cauterization is to return the incisions and bandages when there remains no cause of their rash; and when they are burned with fire, those rashes are scorched and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter .ix.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Cure for blindness that comes upon the eyelids of the patient.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	The spots on the eyelids of the patient are caused by some cause that is gathered together in strength and hardness, and thus it increases and is called "glaucous."
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And this is accumulation of thick moisture on the lower and upper eyelids.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Therefore, the operation is that you should consider if the increase is caused by water on the eyelid and it spreads all over; and the cause of it is clear.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Therefore, cut open that with a blade from the edge, and remove it easily with care; and suspend that of mint and cut off that.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	May it be that you are not prepared for the incision if you do not push into the eyelid with a small incision little by little; then there is no need to notice any cause.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the shape is large, then you should adjust it with a suture; and treat that so that it may be healed.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is little, then it will not harm those for whom that blood of it restores it and heals it.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the increase is declining towards the inner part of the eyelid, then remove that from the inside and suspend it with mint, apart from any incision; and press it with your hand so that it does not spread.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	Then cut open the patient's eye, wash the eyelid with saltwater; and treat the area with a caustic solution so that it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	Of the cauterization on the upper eyelid of the patient.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	It is the one that is produced in the tunics of the upper eyelid, and it especially affects children, causing them to cry due to their eyes crying; they cannot look at the brightness of the sun because of the tears.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And so you can see each other's faces all the time, and they sleep with their eyebrows wet; and the following signs appear in them: when you press the area, you feel a burning sensation within them; and when you touch the area of the lid with your finger, you feel the pulse there.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And there is no way of operation except to place the patient' head on the table and to place a cloth over it and cut a small circle according to the quantity of arznei that contains in all parts, and to place that over the area and press it with your finger so that it is burned within the middle of the circle; and then close it in the middle of the moisture with a knife, cutting along the edge to prevent the moisture from spreading, and do not let it spread.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	May it be that in the preon you cut all the way down so that you can reach the arznei, for in certain places you carry out arznei by incision according to the shape of the white stain.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Therefore, remove it with the cloths that you have wrapped between your fingers and turn it between your right and left hand so that it is destroyed.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And take care that you do not put your finger in the incision so that the moisture does not reach the eye and damage it.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	May it be that you do not put your finger in the incision at the beginning, but rather put it in the incision a small way so that it treats; and then remove it as we have said; and then pour water over it and rub it with sand.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And therefore they should make salt and put it in the concave part of the incision so that the moisture that is left from it is removed.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then treat that so that it is healed.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	May it be that in the area there is a swelling of heat, then treat that with plasters of cold poultice so that it is healed.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	Of ways of touching the patient' pulse.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When the eyelids of the patient are swollen and their natural hair is gone, then touch them with cold poultice and let the tears flow and the eyelids be moistened, so that the cause of damage to the eye, which is called touching the eye, may appear; and it is cured in four ways: either by cauterization with fire; or with acute medicine according to what is said in the chapter on cauterization; or it is performed by cutting and sewing them together; or with reeds according to whether they are open or closed.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And therefore, when you place the patient' head on your left hand, then turn the eyelid of the eye toward your thumb; if it turns, it is good; and if not, pierce that with a needle where it should be turned, and make the needle go through that, — close to the edge of the eyelid where hair does not grow, — close to the hair, and pull the thread over the edge with your thumb toward the eye, and turn that.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	Then cut open the inner part of the eyelid with a blade and place a small piece of cloth or cloth over it, and draw out the thread over the edge with your thumb so that it does not rub against the eye; then remove the thread and turn that.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	However, if it is the case that it is due to a great amount of moisture on the eyelid, for that has become very soft in men; for in men who have this problem, the amount of moisture that is present on the eyelid causes it to be soft and increase in size.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	Then cut open the area between the two lines that you have drawn, and start from the eye of tears within to the eye of the nose.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your incision is close to the natural hair, as it is with the thick-haired man.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	Then place the onion in one of the two angles of the cloth, and remove it completely, and adjust the two lips with a thin thread or yarn, and wipe the blood, and make the blood stick to the hair; and if you want to make it stick, then do not; and do not.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	Then leave the sutures of the threads within for three or four days, and then treat that.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you want to leave the wound unsewn, and heal what there is that dries and constricts, for the eyelid is lifted by the sealing of the wound and its enlargement; but a better sewed wound I have not spoken of yet - and so I said then about the ancient art of taxanir.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	But even if it is necessary to apply pressure on the patient's back, this is a good operation and not something to be feared.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And there is another way of doing this with taxanir; and it is to lay a thin blade on the eyelid, and to raise the eyelid by three small holes separated and gathered together according to this form:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	But if this is not possible, take a needle with thread in it, and insert that into the middle of the figure, and between the other thread and the major tear, and the thread next to it; then adjust these threads to be equal, and then raise them all together, so that the entire figure hangs over the edge on which it is drawn, as if with a raised bridge.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then adjust the two eyelids to be sewn together, and heal whatever is inside that needs to be healed.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	But if you have a blister, you should sew it shut, or cut it open and pour on the ointment, and cover it with something wet.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And some people also make their eyelids turn inwards, so that you should not use the incisions we have spoken of; but a sewed eyelid is more artificial.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	Taxanir on the nose is according to this form:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	and it is to turn the eyelid and divide the figure that is inside according to what I have said; then, with art, make two thin blades or two small stakes whose length is according to the length of the eyelid and whose width is less than the width of the nose.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	Then you have already cut into the ends of any splits, where you have the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Then add a little of the ointment to each of the ends that are too long on the eyelid, and tighten the blades or stakes that you have cut with a firm grip, and leave them there for some time; for by this means the thread will die and rot away, and not remain stuck to it.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	But if it is late, then cut the thread that binds the eyelids together, and heal the wound within that needs to be healed.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	And when it is set in order, the eyelid is raised and does not prick.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the way to make two thin blades according to this form:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and have the quantity of its length and width neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	On the raising of pricking hairs on the nose with a needle.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When the hairs are unnatural, hard and sharp on the nose, then do the operation in this way: take a very thin blade, and pause it on the fiber of a very fine silk thread, and then adjust the ends of it so that they do not touch each other, and cut them with a very slight motion.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And let the length of the threads be according to a palm's width.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	Then you may take another thin blade and place it in a V-shape, and cut the ends of those threads that you have just made, if you wish.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	Then return the patient' head to its original position on the table, and place it near the sun so that your work is visible, for it is a subtle and small operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	Then insert the needle into the root of the hair that requires it to bend, and let it enter quickly into the eyelid so that it comes out at the other side of the hair.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	Then pull the hair out from under it and insert it into the oil, and let there be one or two or three hairs, but not more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	Then take your hand away from that place where the hair has come out of its root into the oil on the eyelid with the natural hair.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	But if the hair is pulled out of its oil and does not come out with it, then you will pull out the oil from the ends that have split and are held by the thread that you have tied, within which the oil will come out.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	Then let the oil remain in place on the nose, for you have pulled out its oil and each hair; then leave them for two or three days, within which time the hairs will come off their places and grow on top of it.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if the hair is too long, then adjust one of the natural hairs, and raise it up to that; or, if you want to lengthen it, then leave it there for a while, and then raise it up.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	On the curing of an inflammation that occurs in the eyelid above.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When an inflammation occurs in the nose, and it is contracted in its skin, or to the right or left side by a poor consolidation of the wound or by sectioning or cauterizing, and it is called leporine, and this either arises from natural causes or from accidental means; and it is caused by a bad consolidation of the wound or by sectioning or cauterizing, or by similar means, it is called leporine.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Then the way to perform the operation is that you cut that consolidation and separate the eyelids, and pause them in it so that there is a little cloth between them; then bind them together within which they are healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And I do not know that you should use cauterization on the nose from any causes that cause it to dry out; for if you do so, it will return to being inflamed more than if you do not use it.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use on the nose from causes that soften it with fenugrec, and immerse in water which is warm and salty; or with a liquid called dヤquilon, which is made from some oils, and dip it in that water; then heal it.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the treasure of your cure is that you perform all that is possible to avoid consolidation according to the form in which it begins.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation that we have spoken of is nothing more than a correction of inflammation that does not return to its original form according to what it begins.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	On the curing of an inflammation in the eyelid below.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This inflammation that is caused in the lower eyelid is called, when it occurs naturally, by a natural cause, or by an accidental means.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	Or it may be caused accidentally by an inflammation, or by a sectioning, or a cauterizing, or by similar causes.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	And the way to perform the operation is that you take a very fine blade with double threads, and place it in the flesh, and make the thread run under the eyelid, so that it passes from the tear duct on the left side into that of the right; then let the thread come out at the ends of the eyelid.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	Then stretch the flesh with the threads attached to it, and cut it with the blade, and sew it to the wide part of the nose with thread.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And if the figure returns to its original position, it is good; but if not, then take a needle and insert it into the split figure, and turn the eyelids around, and sew up the two slits in the middle of the eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	Then adjust the ends of the two slits from different angles of the incision, so that they meet; and then make the figure of the two slits meet with each other.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is a Greek letter: alpha.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And place that flesh there according to the amount it is the width of his hand away from him, that he saws the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And put those parts apart and stitch them with a woolen thread; and also treat those that have said of the soothing medicines and of the water within which it is healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if they are cured with an incision or a stitch or cauterization, then you should know that you make a flat incision on the skin of the eyelid according to what has preceded it.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And separate those two lips according to what they have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the summary of the speech of the cure of alxacrati when it is dry or left alone, let that operation run in him, according to what it is prepared in the form of alxacrati, and that one is in a shape of dots.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the artisans who know it prepare it in any way possible so that it returns to its natural shape or close to it, and this patient according to what is suitable for him by operation and instruments in the greatest dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	Of the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation occurs in some men that it is solid to the membrane of the eye above, and is prohibited from the ease of movement and its natural works, then you should know that you enter the edge of the eyelid away from it, and raise up that or stretch it with a wax.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And you should incise the adhesion with a subtle blade, which is not sharp to the incisors, keeping obtuse so that the patient does not disturb during the operation, and leave the blade that does not hurt the eye in its acuity.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And may your incision that it removes this adhesion with ease within so that the eyelid is returned according to its natural shape and all the adhesion is healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And you should place in the eye salt water which you wash with; or distill in it of Zunic, dissolving in water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And separate between the eyelid and the eye with a calve of him, and place on the eye wool infused with membrane of wine, and immediately third day uses of causes of consolidation within that it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter 16.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	Of incision of the eye and of the eminence of flesh of the lacrimal.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	You should know that the eye is according to two ways, either it is nervous and seems like a hard cyphers subtle; or it is not nervous, resembling white frozen water, which when it is touched, it takes with an onion, and is cut off, and the onion does not stick to it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both spices do not begin unless from the lacrimal major within that it goes little by little so that it covers the view and prohibits the light and movement of the eye.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	May the way of acting in the incision is that the patient keeps his head down on his chest, and immediately opens his eyelids, and raises the eyelid to your hand, and collects the eye with an onion of few duplicates, and stretches it from above.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And pick up an eyehook and put it in the eye of a horse or cow or water, or of any other things, or duplicate the end of the hook little by little and keep that in the middle of the eye with its edge, and push it into the eye with the hook, and cut it through the edge of the eye; and stretch it from above, and duplicate the end of the hook little by little and keeps that in the middle of the eye with its edge, and push it into the eye with the hook, and cut it.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And so you continue to stretch it with the edge within the back of it.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And you should incise the edge of the eye with a subtle blade or with small scissors, and leave the natural flesh of the lacrimal so that by incision of it does not produce continuous flow of tears.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And some times the eye is extended with salt water or with faith, as has been said, and immediately it is removed with a lion's blade, of which shape this is.
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And you should guard that with the blade you do not touch the corneal membrane and that it runs through its rupture, and that the pupil is pierced.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And immediately after incision pour a little salt water in the eye and leave that within another day; and also treat that with water that it is healed.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the eye is not nervous and you cannot put in it the needle, nor does it stick to it, then know that this special kind of eye is healed with medicines, and is healed thus with a view and recommendation in division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to incise that, then open the patient' eye and pick up a subtle lion's blade of acute shape according to this form:
am subtilitat.	with subtlety.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if that is rarefied and is confined and taken in the edge of the eye, then distill from it in the eye with faith or salt water, and leave the eye within another day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And immediately repeat the operation within that it is healed all of him that it is his, but that is the opposite, because you should leave that and cure at the beginning of the wound within that it is healed.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And immediately repeat your operation on that eye with reason so that it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The eminence of the lacrimal, if it is not seen in the eye as great harm, should be suspended with an onion; and incise that from one edge, and do not finish the incision unless the flow of tears stops.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And immediately distill in the lacrimal faith or salt water within that it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter 17.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	Of incision of algazardenic and of water which is born from meat that it is joined to the eye.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Some times in the eyelids of animals is born rosy meat, and it is placed within that it covers the pupil, or moves closer or further from the eyebrows and presses them together at the sides, and is joined to the rosy flesh of the pilar.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	May the operation in him be that the patient keeps his head down on his chest, and immediately opens his eyelids, and collects all that meat with a hook convenient to water, and then water with a forceps or a basket; and immediately incise the meat at the beginning within that it is finished by the incisors, and guard that of the eye which does not hurt that.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And may your incision be the one that incises those or the blade that we have recommended in the incision of the eye with the hook, or with small scissors according to what comes next the form of it is appropriate to this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	And then when your incision is completed and all that meat is healed, then fill the eye with salt water, or distill in it powdered rosy medicine, and place it over the eye with a membrane of wine within that it is assured from the pustule.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if there is any cause of algardenic and it is broken by a cut, and you fear a pustule, then leave the eye and cure that pustule with water, and immediately repeat the operation within that it is healed, and simulate in the meat that it occurs in the eye of this kind.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	However, you should know that any cure of the eye from the eye of frew through natural or accidental ways by fire, and do not put your hand in any of these operations within that you see that this member is suffering that operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	Of the collection of sap from the wound.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Sap should be collected from the wound, which is kept dry and clean, and the wound allowed to heal over a period of days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore, at the beginning, you must consider whether the wound in which sap is drawn is strong and not another illness besides sap, then you will collect that sap.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And if you command the patient to raise his head to the side, and suspend those veins with one or two threads according to your prudence; and that one thread should be of a fine double thread according to this form:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or two threads of varying thickness according to this form:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	Then those veins should be collected with fine thread, and the thread should be changed every hour, so that the veins do not stick to the wound and become loose.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And be careful not to cut the wound at the edges of the spatula; and if your work is in front of the sun, and stand firm in your work so that you do not cut anything else besides those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	When you are finished, then you will distill in the wound clear water or salt water to wash away what has been collected there, so that it is not infected with any disease.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	If you cannot collect enough water in that hour, and then you will apply something to relieve the pain of the wound, and let it rest for a few days until the pain is relieved and the swelling has subsided due to the swelling.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	Then repeat the above process according to the following method within which it will be cured.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	This is the form of the scissors:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	Of reducing swelling to the nose.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you treat swelling with cauterization or acute medicine according to the sequence of events, and it is not cured, then do not remove the swelling, but rather cut off the maturity of it, and extract all the moisture that is in it, leaving the bone uncovered.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the bone is exposed and rotten or black in it, then you will cut it with a tool whose form is as follows:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	It is called a sharp cap, and it is made of hard iron, and the cap is round so that it can be pierced with a point of lime or sharpened with a fine point (so it can be pierced with a point).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	Then place that above the place where the bone is corrupted, and move it back and forth between the toes, pressing your hand little by little until you feel that the corruption is smooth.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	Then water should be applied to it a few times, and then restore the place with healing and drying agents.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	If the place is consolidated and good meat covers it well, and the wound is closed by the skin after 10 days, and there is no swelling or bleeding, then you will know that it is cured.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And if not, then do not leave it as it is, but rather reduce the breach to the shape of the nose, and according to this method: and if you cut through the second bone with iron or acute medicine, and after that expose the bone, then you will use the following method:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	The length of the iron triangle, and the fist of it should end in a point at the edge, and so often as possible.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	Then place that above the bone, and keep it from the lacrimal; and place your hand a little on the edge of the wound, and press your hand little by little around the edge until you feel the patient's pulse beating strong and steady through the whole bone, and the patient should not feel any pain as you move your hand.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Then restore the place with healing and drying medicines applied to it, so that it does not swell up again.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	If the meat at the wound does not endure, then the matter that flows into the joints returns to the nose, and water should be applied to it again, but less than before.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	Of reducing a swelling on the spine.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the spine protrudes in its entirety and does not hurt or decrease, then you should loosen the binding, and then tie it tightly, and then apply oil to it that is made from acacia and olive and turpentine, and then place a plaster over the spine that is made of felt.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the way to make powder for this is that you take sheets of linen cloth, and each sheet should be double in width, and then cut it into four pieces; and make these pieces from this cloth.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	Then place those powders one on top of the other according to the quantity that is needed for the spine.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	Then tighten those powders on top of each other with a strong and tight binding, and then apply the oil for healing to it; and then remove the bindings, and let the spine rest in its position throughout the day, and at night cover it with felt.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	If meanwhile the binding becomes soft, then you should make it tight again.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	Then remove the binding at night, and cover it with felt.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if the spine has already been reduced, that is good, and if not, then repeat the plaster with the powder and the binding and the vents until it is cured.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	Of cutting out a swelling on the eyelids.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When there is swelling on the eyelids, and then it becomes large and protrudes, then cut out the eyelids according to this method: if you can reach the edge of the eyelid with a thread, use that thread to mark the edge of the swelling; then place a double thread from the lacrimal edge, and pierce that with a needle, and let it pass through the swelling and secure it on the other side; and then cut out the swelling with that same thread, and tighten it.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	Then remove the needle and place it on top of the wool infused with milk of magpie, and leave it for a while before cutting it off; and then make sure that the thread does not cut through the eyelid but stops at the edge of the swelling.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	Then heal the patient with water, which comforts them when their disease is cured.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	In some cases of swelling on the eyelids, a circle of cloth is tied around the whole eyelid, and then it is pierced with a fine needle that comes from the edge of the eyelid, and the watery secretions are drawn out, and the eyelid is lowered and tightened up.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	Then tighten it up so that it does not hurt.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De curacio de alconati.	Of the treatment of eye diseases.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This disease, which is called "alconata", is not anything other than a sickness that is adjusted to the spine like descending water, and it is not that way.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	The way to treat it is that you put the eye patch on the bed and turn it over, and then take your two fingers and press them together firmly against each corner of the eye, and then tie them so that they do not move apart; and then place a piece of cloth over the eye and tighten it, and remove the patch for a short time during the day, and at night cover both eyes with felt.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not go down to the bottom, you will know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	If it is not ready for the eye to go down with water that we have mentioned, then tie the patch over the eye tightly, and then take a fine needle and pierce it through the conjunctiva of the cornea into the edge of the eyelid (just above the spot where the eyelid meets the skin), so that the disease is removed from it.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Then, when it is finished, you will distill the herbal water that you have prepared in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have already built fenugrec and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat other causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter .xxii.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	On the treatment of water coming from the liver.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	You have already said about the waters in division and what serves to pierce through speech announcing, then according to health.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Then, tell them that you should pour the water between your legs over a pan and place the liver in it, then strain it.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And place your left hand near the eyelid of the liver and if the water is in the left liver then place your right hand, or if it is on the right.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And with your right hand take the almighty, if the liver is left, or with your left hand, if the liver is right.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And place the tip of the almighty near the crown because of the thickness of the fat on the liver from the lower eyelid, and then pour out the almighty with good will and your right hand.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	Then pierce into the liver and feel that the almighty has already reached the cause seen.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And that the measure of the way of the almighty to the eye is the space from the pupil to the end of the blackness, and it is the crown of the liver; for you will see at that pupil with the vision of the eye through the clarity of the corneal layer.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	Then pour out the almighty into the place in which there is water, and then throw another bucket of water over it, so that if the water descends quickly, then take the water from a vessel, and then put the liver in its cavity.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	Then pause a little bit; if the water descends quickly, then take another break before pouring out the almighty.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And then, when it is dried up and does not descend, take the almighty with ease, and roll it a little at a time with your right hand, and then dissolve in water a little clear salt from gems and mix it with the liver; and then pause outside the liver, or stop or wash the liver with rose oil and album of lamb and dip the liver into its cavity.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	Perhaps these are not from our times but they rest over that liver trisseled with lamb's fat.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if you don't obey your almighty to the instrument of the liver because it is hard, for this is of some men that the liver is hard, then when you take the almagy into its cavity because of its hardness – for from this the form is taken:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And then pierce out at that connection, and don't finish your right hand in the trap, and don't stop unless you pour out water for the almighty.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	Then bring out the almighty according to what I have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	Then prepare the liver's work, that it may be prepared to lie down in the dark house, and it is forbidden from all movement.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	Then pause on the nature of the water so that its nature may be soft, and don' t touch the patient' s head to the left or right.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And make an incision according to its disposition in the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	Then lead them out of that dark house and examine their eyes, and then bring back the incision by the seventh day.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And don' t pour water in the time of treatment, or a little after infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	While you keep water apart because it sweats from the liver strongly and with great effort.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	Perhaps this may happen, then take the liver out on the seventh day, and then adjust it with water to stop the fever.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Then wash the patient's eyes and pause over their facial orifice to which it may be directed the sweating from within by keeping it apart for several days, existing in the dark house.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	Then bring out of that dark house with grace and talk about its causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	You know that in alchemy it is not excused from the discipleship of vision to some visions, and then you are sharp about the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	It has already reached us from some of those whom the Arts have touched, and some say that it brings fire to the alchemical water by piercing with it.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	However, there is no sight of the one that has brought perfect water, nor water that has been drunk by some of the antediluvials; and it may be that this is new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of alchemical water to which attention should be paid, because from those who do not know:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	They are made of iron properly speaking, and they are the ends of its sharp triangle here, this subtlety being divided into three parts, so that:
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter.xxiv.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	On the treatment of nosebleeds in the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When the blood of various meats is mixed together and it is a cause that is gathered by the motus of the feet or to pollen; then this badness is called pollen because it seems like those of the foot represented.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And from that is the cancerous meat, a Lapus, with a white color; and from that is the lion's meat not of a brown color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	So then in that which is of the lion's meat not fraudulent or cancerous, take the liver between your legs and place it under the sun, and pluck the liver' eyes out, and cut them into pieces in those meats.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	Then pull it apart from the middle parts, and then cut out water that you have understood from those with a sharp tool within which is impossible to remain; if for some reason it falls, take the water with ease within one of the subtle tools within which you understand that all the meat has already been eaten. If it falls for some reason, then take the water with care within one of the subtle tools within which you understand that all the meat has already been eaten.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	Perhaps this may happen, then take the water apart which you have kept; or from the malignant fevers, then cut out and cauterize that within which is impossible to remain, and all the holes are filled in.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	Then bring it into the nose with ease near the incision of the sharp edge and water or blood.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	Perhaps the nose is wet, and if you bring out moisture into the palate, then you understand that it is healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	Perhaps the moisture does not penetrate further, then you understand that inside the nose is meat in the upper parts of the bones; because it has not been cut away.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Then lead out the faithful within that is not coarse, and taste it with the tongue; and between each nut, pause to measure the amount of what you taste, and bring out the liver part into the nose with a sharp edge or with another cause which is possible to remain.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And if water has reached its end form, so that it throws out the odor of the liver within which it reaches the nostrils, and is hung on the golden chain, for ten children like this are attracted by the smell to those who want to do it; then it is a reason for that which you want to do.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	Then pause the two ends of the faithful one, one end which comes out over the nose and the other which hangs down in the nose, and then bring out the lock of meat with the nuts that are within the faithful; and make water inside, and you understand that the meat has already reached the nuts of the faithful.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	And then take out the kidney, and pause it in the hand of the surgeon with the abduction of the SANC one leg, and make it for three days or more until the poison runs all over that which is rotten from the flesh.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And at the end of the cause, pause in the hand a tube of lead for several days until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	Or if you find that it is not cured, then use this one.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	This is the form of the making-clean instrument with which oils and medicines are distilled in the nose:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	Make it of silver or of brass, which is like a small lantern opened up, so also with a little cavity, and meat-like.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you wish, make a tube closed up also with a cane, and the tube of the making-clean instrument is flat, open; and which has a handle in the back of it, having which hold that when you blow on it or pour oil or water that you wish from the secrets and causing diseases.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	These are the precious making-clean instruments: take of beaver, of white billy-ray, of ginger, and of amber, of long pepper, of saracen's eye, of spikenard an ounce. Take with suck of blood and of milk, and let pills be made, and one pill be put in the water which you drink, and let it go down in the patient's nostrils while he faces towards them.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter .XXV.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	Of these nails put at the extremities of the nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Moles which are nailed at the extremities of the nose, and are made great and swollen in several days until the mole is seen.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And by water which you pour on that at the beginning of the appearance of it, and inherit all that.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	Then place over the area a fire or a burning medicine which is in the patient' place.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	Or if the patient' wound is delayed until it is swollen, then consider if it is hard, of dark color and of little feeling, then do not touch that which is nailed to him by fire because of the great evil over him on that part of the patient who had it.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the pustule is of a lion's touch and not of a dark color, and sometimes it is possible to scratch it entirely in all that, then evacuate the patient' disease and scratch that with fear, and heal the area with water which runs out and compresses within until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter  .XXVI.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	Of the nose' surgery and of the lips and of the ear when the continuity is dissolved by plague or by simile.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	Know that when this continuity happens in one of these cartilage, it gives little benefit to that operation unless in some men.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, if this happens because of some cause of those, that you consider if it is a fresh plague of the patient' mouth, and then adjust the two lips of the plague with sutures, and then heal that within until it is healed.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the lips of that solution of continuity are already separated, and each one is healed well, then consider if you remove each part of its knot apparently until it does not hurt any more.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then adjust the two lips with sutures and strengthen them, and pour on those the dragon's powder and the triple salt, and pause over the dust a little plaster of Paris, or of some other of those cement powders, and leave that glued for two days or three, then remove that and replace that plaster and leave that within until it is healed.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	The way of the suture is that you add the solution of continuity or with needles as described in the suture of the belly, or add the solution of continuity with thread also.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter .XXVII.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	Of those causes which come out in the two lips inside.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Moles which are seen to some men in the insides of their lips like clumps of grass, and some of them are small and some are big.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, if you turn the lips and each part of those hardnesses of all, then pause the abruption filling up the place with triple salt until that plague is restrained, then wash that with honey and heal the area with water which is astringent, within until it is healed.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter .XXVIII.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	Of the incising of the flesh fitted to the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Great of small nails over the flesh fitted to the gums which the young ones attract white, then consider if you hang that with a string or if you have that with the hooks and incise that as far as the tooth, and leave that to run or the plague or the plague.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	Then place over the area triple salt or any other astringent powder.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if that flesh returns, then incise that secondarily, and cauterize that because cauterization does not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter  .XXX.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	Of teeth' causes to bite.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When on the surface of the teeth in the insides and in the fora between the gums are adjusted coarse roughness, leaves and some of those are black and they are formed yellow or green within until the gum is corroded by water, and the teeth that leave are coarse.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And then consider if you pass salt between your teeth and pause the top of it in the tooth, and rub those teeth which present those roughnesses and causes resembling sand within until they do not change color, and that does not return to the black and the yellow and the others before they are defined.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	So if that water which is in those at the beginning of the cause is good; and otherwise, then consider if you repeat the cause over those every day and every other until it comes to the last statement in that which you wish.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	Know that the teeth have need of various forms and of different figures according to how it is prepared for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And for this reason that the rawness by which the tooth is cut from inside is different from the rawness by which it is cut between teeth according to other shapes, and those forms of rawness are always prepared, so you will see them soon enough:
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter   .XXX.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	Of the extraction of teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	Consider if you heal the tooth of its pain completely and delay in the eradication of it entirely because there is no cause that replaces the lost substance of it when it is eradicated, for it is a sublime substance within which is an excuse in the eradication of it.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	And then consider if the patient' tooth is forcibly extracted, firmly you must know that which pain does the patient' tooth cause, for moles have seen this water through an operation of the bars.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Then you must know that which is the painful tooth, and that you know well, then consider if you scarify in the path of the tooth with a needle which has no point, within until it is dissolved from the gum completely, and then cut that with tiny scissors or with sharp tweezers little by little until that disengages.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And he places a large towel in his strong hand to make a loud and strong noise, and puts the head of the patient between the thorns that are at the bottom so that they do not hurt me, and takes the tooth according to its right position so that it does not break or give more pain to the patient.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And if it is not a broken tooth, then take one of those instruments, and place that below all parts with ease and attempt the removal as if it were done at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	But if the tooth is broken or corroded, then cover that with a piece of cloth and stretch it with a delicate string so that it does not break in the hour of your contraction on that one; hold it like this.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And you open completely the incision in the circuit of all parts of the gum and keep your strength so that it does not break or tear that one, and return to the patient for the harm that is less than the first pain of it.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And you must not let water flow that these ignorant and audacious barbers do at the end and at the beginning of their cutting on it, for if they give water that we have recommended; because those who have seen bring about great men with difficult wounds, all their roots or some of them, or that you extract that one with some bones from the jaw also with water have testified.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And the eradication of it is washed with cold water or hot vinegar.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if there is a flow of blood from it, as if there were little streams, then cut off some hair and sprinkle it on the wound, and if that does not stop, causticate it.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The shape of the forceps and delicate tweezers is more easily grabbed on the tooth at the beginning, with a short handle and thick grip, so that they are not twisted when you work with them.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And be like this, with times of a short handle, and when you start to work on those ones are not bent, are short extremities.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And they are made of iron from India, with right extremities and some of those extremities have teeth that others intrude in them and start by contraction and a strong grip, and some of the extremities of those ones are like the beak of a crow, which is sharp, and they are of a strong grip.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	Of the eradication of teeth and the breaking of bones of the mandibles that are broken.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you should eradicate the tooth that is broken for some reason, then return to the spot with mud for a day or two until the spot becomes soft; and if you see that the extremities are joined together like the beak of a crow or glove, the shape of the tweezers:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The extremities of them are made inside like this with lime or allium.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if you do not obey your hand with these tweezers or tweezers, then return to the root and cut off all the flesh and introduce the instrument which has the name, so is a small pince, whose shape is this:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And be of a short handle, thick, and not bent so that it does not break.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	Therefore, if the root is broken by water, it is good; and if not, help you with these other instruments, of which these are the shapes: the shape of the first instrument is a triangular handle at the end of which there is some thickness:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The shape of the second instrument is that it be of a triangular and short handle.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And you are helped by these instruments, having two handles, and this is the shape near the end:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	And other instruments will be needed in shaving teeth; for this is well made with this instrument that is like an oar, and this is the shape:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	of the triangular handle that is bent or short, which has some thickness, and is not bent so that it does not break.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And you should know that the tools for teeth are like other tools.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	The skilled and subtle craftsman in art, invents for himself according to his own will the operation and the various pains; because there are different pains from which the small did not speak or pause their own instrument, because of the shapes of different kinds.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the bone of the jaw or other bones in the mouth are broken, then it is carefully returned to its place with water that is convenient for them of the instruments and forceps we have talked about in the extraction of teeth roots, and help you with movements of which this is the shape:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And be in some little thickness to the other, and be stretched or tied up with the mouth so that it does not slip or run away while the bone is completely broken; and return the place with convenient medicines according to water.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if there is a small break in the bone, then take that part of it and its blackness, and cure that within which has healed.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter 32.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	Of the treatment of prominent teeth compared to others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When prominent teeth are not in line with the natural course of their peers, the shape is sharp, and especially when they are on women, and most when they are on elderly women; then return to the tooth that does not fit another tooth, and if it is not joined to another tooth, then cut it off with this instrument whose shape is similar to a pig's tail, and which is made of iron from India with a sharp extremities.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And be your incision with which you cut that tooth in two days because of the hardness of the tooth, and that it does not touch another tooth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if prominent tooth is broken with grating, then grind it with a grinding of iron from India, whose shape is this:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And be all of it iron from India and the point evenly; and be of a short handle with sharp points like needles, which shape the tooth is ground little by little in two days with ease, so that another tooth does not touch or cause pain.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	Then cut off that one at the end, and take it apart with small scissors.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if it is a tooth whose one part is broken and held by the tongue, then return to the root that is exposed and bent, and smooth it so that the tongue does not catch or corrupt the word.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter 33.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	Of the restoration of broken teeth with gold or silver wire.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When there is a fall or a blow to the teeth, and the mallet does not hit them, but you have treated them with stinging medicines, and your treatment has not helped, then return them to their place with gold wire, and not silver, because silver changes color quickly and does not last long; but gold never changes its color.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And be the wire in such subtility and thickness according to the amount that can enter between the teeth; and the shape of the cut is that you take the wire and double it between two healthy teeth, and if it grows too much between two broken ones, until it reaches the thread to the healthy tooth on the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	Then return to the position in the middle of the broken part from which you started, and tighten your hand with ease and skill until it does not hurt.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And may your heart be as strong as the string on which the threads of the teeth are tied, so that it does not break.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	Then with forceps or tweezers, cut off the excess ends of the thread, and place it in any place, and turn it and hide it between the healthy tooth and the rotten one, so that it does not harm the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	Then let that string be straight with a rope.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	If it comes off or breaks, strengthen that one or those with another thread all the time.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	This is the shape of teeth and the form of their correction of two healthy teeth and two rotten ones, thus bound:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when a tooth or two come back to their place, and they are resown in that way with what has been sowing, and they remain in that condition.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And do not make this except with good hands and wise people.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And some teeth are broken by the bones of cows, and they are made in their form of teeth, and placed in place where a tooth fails, and strengthened in that way with what we have said, and remain and serve for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter.XXXIV
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	On the incision of the ligature that runs in the language and prohibits licking.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This Ligature that leaves the tongue some times or is natural to the man who doesn't have it, or happens by accident and happens because of a plague that has already been consolidated.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation on him is that you work on the mouth of the patient, the head existing in the sun; and raises his tongue, and cut off that nervous ligature according to its length so that the tongue does not stick to it.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	If there is any hardness or denudation on it and that is standing because of the consolidation of a plague, then you cut off that one with oil and cut it according to its length so that the nodule is not cut off.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And keep that there is no crack in the bone and that you do not cut here arcing and allow blood to flow from a wound.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	Then wash the traces of the incision with water or vinegar or with wet rags, and place the tongue away, and if it is a new wound that has just been cut, then let the patient leave his tongue out for a while so that it does not consolidate again.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	If there is a flow of blood, place over the site vinegar dried up; if the blood flows from elsewhere, then cauterize the site with dry salt that is dissolved in water.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	Then treat it for other causes before it is cured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter.XXXV
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	On the extraction of a runnel from the tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Some times there is a small lump on the tongue that resembles a wart and prevents the tongue from its normal operation; and it is hard to remove from inside so that it fills the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the operation on him is that you work on the patient's mouth facing the sun and consider the lump.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if it changes its color or becomes black, a hard one, that the patient does not lose his feeling, then do not touch that one because it is hard.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it is turned white, which is moisture, then you put oil on him, and cut that one with a thin blade, and cut it all up; and if blood flows in the hour of your operation, then place over his clothes dried up, so is vinegar, before it is cured.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then return to your work before he is tired with care of him, and wash it with water and salt, and treat that one with the other treatment in water before it is cured.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter.XXXVI
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	On the extraction of two warts and that which is nothing in the mouth and other warts.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When such warts are found in the mouth, then they are glandules that are put together, which are small and hard and have two warts, which when you treat them with oil that we have said in the division and they are not cured, then consider if the lump is hard, of white color, of little feeling, then do not touch that one with iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is a roan color and the root is thick, then do not touch that one with iron because of the flow of blood; before taking it out, let it mature inside, and then cut it off or pull it out.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is a white color, which is thin, then let that one be cut;
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the operation on him is that you consider before your operation if he has already recovered his warts by rest or has decreased with a decrease; and then put the oil on him facing the sun, and let his head be in the sun, and open his mouth, and serve themselves between their own hands away from the tongue of him, keeping it apart from this instrument that is made of noble material, and this is its shape:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	It should be made of silver or gold, and should be thin with a blade.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	Then you press it onto the tongue and show it to him the lump, and put oil on that one in the morning, let it rest for as long as you can.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Another water that pulls off any cause of the tunics, and cut off that one with an instrument whose shape is this:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	And it is assembled with tweezers, however, the ends of them are sharp, so that the hole of each one is in the edge of the other, very sharp, which should be made of iron blackened.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	If this instrument is not at your disposal, then cut it with a blade whose shape is this: It should be sharp from one side and blunt from the other.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And then you cut one hole, and cut the other according to this method of incision, and let the incision of the patient be washed with water rubbed.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If there is a flow of blood, wash the wound with decoccions of pomegranates or mulberries, and similar things to those of the causes within which the flow of blood is stopped, and then treat that one before it is cured.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And some times there are other warts than the two warts in the mouth, and cut them according to what I have said about cutting two holes together.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And I have treated a woman with warts that were born in her mouth, which warts were of roan color, of little feeling, which had already closed the mouth of him, and the woman breathed well, and had already forbidden him to eat or drink anything, and was close to death if it did not stop;
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the lump has grown so much that it is pushing out two teeth, which have come out through two teeth.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	Then I hid him with a sharp instrument and cut it, and threw that one away, and there was a great amount of it, and then I cut off the tongue of him with my hand, and then I put that one on the lump.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	Then I cut off a large part of him, and he did not bleed but a little blood.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Then absolutely his mouth was opened by that woman, and he started to drink water again, then I did not stop cutting those warts for a long time, and the warts succeeded one another in that place, which incised within that it is prolonged.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Therefore I operated on him and cauterized his testicles, also because of the addition; and therefore I walked around and did not know that God was with me then.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter .xxxvii.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	Of incision when it is heated.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When pus is found in the uvula, and it is heated and long, then it is called a 'perpendicular'; but if it is thick and round, then it is called a 'bubble'.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	On the other hand, if it is cured with water that has been mentioned in the division, and you do not recognize your cure, and examination many times that the apostema is still there and subtle, then you should know that you cut out what is aggregated round; and if it is long, and is blood, of dark color or black, and is not a centimeter, then you should know that you have cut out his testicles, for in that there is fear on the patient.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you see the second time that I have described to you of its whiteness and length, then you should know that you should cut his testicles and press his tongue with an instrument by which it is shaped and put on a new one, and pull it down and cut it with one of two instruments that I describe in the incision of the two balls.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And you should not cut it except with water that is put on the natural term of addition; for if you cut him more, you will make him speak badly.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And the incision, use water with which I have described in the incision of the two balls, and cure it within so that it is cured.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	On the other hand, if the patient was frightened by the incision of his testicles, so that he uses fire in the cauterization of him it is fear, and the way of cauterizing him it is not except with sharp water, for you should pause the top of the patient on the knee, and press his tongue with the instrument that I have described, and take from the water that I have described in the chapter of cauterization, and pour into it as if alive, and do not let it be thick or subtle, and then fill the cavity of the instrument whose form this is:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	The extrimity of him its cavity in which the medicine has been put with the cavity of a spoon, and place the instrument on the uvula, and the patient chews or spits because of the internal medicine, so that it does not send from that for a good reason about his testicles and makes them come out.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And then take your hand with the medicine, and press it on the uvula for a space of one hour within which it is blackened and numbed by the chewing of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you want, take hold of it and wrap it over the end of the ray, and dip the hand in the medicine, and put the ray into the hand with the wrapped ray in a tube up to that the wrapped ray adheres to it, and let it be there because it will dry and fall off in three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you want to repeat the medicine, repeat it, and the cauterization wash in the circuit of the uvula with wrapped ray in a tube, and wash it with water that has been described in the circuit of him of the medicine, and let it be washed with soap and salt, and treated inside with incisions within so that it is cured.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	This kind of cure is more safe than incision and less frightening from fear.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Some are cured of the uvula with water that is very subtle that cauterizes and cuts it, because it is cured with sub-fumigatio in this way: Prepare calamus, hyssop, oregano, rue, marjoram arabic, chamomile, bread and similar to those of the herbs, and adjust all of them, or some of them, in a pan, and put them in vinegar, and boil; and the pan be boiled with clean water, and be placed on the patient's bed, and over its head a trap is placed, about which is placed an instrument of iron according to this way; it should be made of silver or iron.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And then the end is put in the patient's mouth within so that the steam comes to the uvula on the quantulum, within which the uvula is dimly lit.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And repeat over those spots within so that they are dry, and you should know that you do not make this cure in the coming of the appearance of pustules, because it would adjust too much on the pustule, and do not let it be water, but rather the declaration of the pustule of him cauterized.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	On the other hand, if you do not have this instrument with you, then take a cane and compose at the end of it a tube of sheep's stomach, so that the patient' s mouth is closed, because the tube of the stomach prevents the steam to burn the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	This cure is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter.xxxviii.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	Of extraction of thorns and of water that adheres to the testicles, and of other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Pustules adhere on the testicles or thorns or any other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Then you should extract water that appears, and the eye sees it, because you press the tongue on the instrument in front of the sun, so that to you is declared which water is in the testicles.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And water that does not appear to you in the testicles, then you should make him vomit the patient before the food is digested in the stomach, because it brings about the cause of the attachment of the testicles is a foaming; or if he drinks one fish of oil or of radish or a piece of dry bread; or take a sponge of marine sea dried, and wring it hard with the fist, and then make the patient drink it, for it will make him vomit, because it comes to the place in which there are thorns and is extracted.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And then take an eel and put it in the fist, and let it be sitting on a table and extracted; or take a pig and put it upside down, and let it be extracted.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	On the other hand, if you do not make him vomit by those causes that I have described, then take an instrument of lead according to this form:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	It should be thicker than a small ray, and in the end of it there is a cavity that you put in the patient' s testicles with ease.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And the patient raise his head up, and you should know that the touching of his skull of the testicles, so that he does not eat with them or with a tooth, or that it is put on him hand.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	However, the patient who puts it is more, because of his knowledge of the place of the attached cause and pulls up his hand to the instrument, all this according to the quantity that is prepared for him within so that he vomits.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter.xxix.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	Of extraction of blood thorns attached to the testicles.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When blood is extracted with water that I have described in the division of the cure with medicines and do not recognize it, then consider in the testicles of the patient on the sun, because you have moved the tongue of him with the instrument which I have described to you.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Then if you see the blood, extract it with a little ounce or a gentle hand carefully.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not possible to extract it in that way, then take a hollow tube and put it into the testicles of the patient, and place on the cavity of the tube an igniting iron, and pour as much water (as long as the blood has stopped being alive and has come out of the testicles) and abstain from drinking water.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	And then take a full bucket of water to rub, and open his mouth in it, and wash his mouth with it; and don't drink anything from that or have the water next to him for an hour or more because the blood is cold when you feel it.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	If it is not a fire-burned wound with water that we have mentioned, then smoke the patient's thigh with cumin or asafetida using the instrument that we have mentioned in the combustion of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Boil water, so as to cool it down quickly.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And this is another way of doing surgery in smoke treatment for the patient' tongue; take a pipe in which charcoal is ignited and the pipe is covered with a blanket with a loop, and place the end of the instrument in that loop; then remove the smoke treatment; and place the patient' mouth on the end of the tube, and close his mouth so that the smoke treatment is not fire-burned until you know that the smoke treatment has reached the patient' throat because the patient' throat is very quick to feel the smoke treatment.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if it doesn' taste good, then do the smoke treatment again quickly, and prevent the patient from drinking, and eat salty foods and fruits, and don' drink water, and it is necessary that this treatment be fire-burned.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the shape of the instrument with which the throat is removed from the patient' neck when seen; and it is similar to pliers except for once because it is in its curvature:
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	which is placed on the patient' neck and its end is similar to an egret beak, which is sharp, so that when you touch anything it doesn' leave marks.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter 10.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which is the summary of surgery in regards to amputations and dissection.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	The amputations are special surgeries, done in specific ways, following their remembrance of them, each one from this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they are various in piercing and dissection of them by two ways, the first one being for the specific type of amputations, and the second because they deal with liquids.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second way is appropriate for the places where injuries occur, because the amputation wound in the head is different from that in the buttocks, and the same goes for amputations in the flesh, and each of them requires surgery.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And some amputations are those that heal without needing to be pierced, but rather because the wound has healed on its own or because it has been taken care of.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	And other amputations are those that need to be cut when they are crossed, and do not heal according to their completion, such as amputation near a joint, because if the limb is prolonged within the body, and it is weakened by corrupting the ligaments or nerves of that joint, causing a contraction of the limb; or it is an amputation close to a main member, and if you delay piercing it, it will not heal properly towards the main member; or it is near the buttocks, so it is pierced without being madurat, and it does not matter if it is a male or female genitalia, because it does not cause any harm; but it needs to be cut carefully, and it is not complete unless it has been cut from the inside of the genitals, and the blood vessels are cut, so that it does not continue to flow.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	You should know the time for piercing the amputation, and then it is when it has healed.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	You should know that it is when it has healed because there is a decrease in pain and fever, and an improvement in blood pressure and pulse rate, and the head of the amputation becomes less sensitive, and other symptoms appear.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And because you should know that piercing occurs in the place where pus comes out from the amputation site, and pus flowing from the wound's edge.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And the piercing should be done at an early stage of healing, whether it is in the members' joints or feet, and in the places where ligaments, nerves, or tendons are located; and finally, in any other place that does not reflect, because in those that reflect, use the piercing according to the member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	If the amputation is in a flesh location, then you should know that piercing occurs within the time frame of healing, according to its completion, for what has been said; because if you pierce it in front of the genitals, it prolongs the member of the person who is pierced, and it adds to their pain, and hardens their lips, and deepens their appearance.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	And other amputations should be pierced according to the location of the flesh or body part that needs to be removed, or according to the part where the limb is needed.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And you should know that small piercings are administered, and in large amputations, large piercings or sections according to the variety of their size.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And other amputations are those in which the wound needs to be sutured and sewn shut, and it is done when it has already healed, such as in cases of wounds that have become infected and pus-filled.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And those that are sutured in dissection have three angles; and those that are sutured with a figure of a leaf, and those that are sutured for the amputations of the limbs.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And they are those in which round section or lunar section is administered, and it resembles this.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	And the one that has a head should be pierced with superficial needles, because you should pierce it with shallow piercing or flat piercing only.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And when the amputation is large and has already collected some blood, pierce it and don' stop until you remove all the blood; take a piece out of it, and on another day, take out another piece, and then take out a larger piece, and then boil water with herbs, and let it cool down, and dip the wound in it to clean it.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	And most importantly if the patient' humor is virile or feminine, or a child or an old person, because the animal spirit moves with the exit of blood, and it hardens the patient, and you should close their wounds.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	You should keep this chapter carefully, and you should know that you avoid diseases, and consider whether the amputation wound is small or a flat section, then administer a single suture to close it; but if the amputation is large and the sections of the piercing are short, then pause your work in any place where they meet together.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if in the amputation a part of the tendon or bone is cut away or broken, then you should know that you should tie it with a old man's thread or a thread of linen, and as soon as you have finished cutting off parts or breaking them, wipe the blood; and strengthen that within three days; and then process it and clean the wound with water and soap, and let it heal.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	If blood flows during the surgery, you should administer warm water and vinegar in which wrap a linen cloth, and place it on the area where the blood is flowing, so that the blood does not dry out; because blood that dries can cause pain.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	And if the bleeding continues, then you should know that you administer surgery and cure, and sprinkle the herbs that we have mentioned in various places; for example, in the wound itself, in the area where the blood is flowing, in the skin around it, and so on.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	If it is wintertime, and the amputation site is near a joint, then you should know that you should wrap powder of wine or oil around the joints.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	E if it is in the summer and the blisters are fleshy, then you should cover that you pour dust of the earth with water and oil or wine and all of this be washed within three days as we said, and then you should untie the blister and clean away that and prepare for the cure of him what is necessary within that is healthy.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	Then so is what that is necessary of the knowledge of the cure of blisters universally, more by the way of distinction I have already said of all blister in what way it is a way of the cure of him by chapters separately.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter .xli.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	Of the section of blisters that come in the shoulder of the arm.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the small area of the arm, there are blisters of different sizes that contain skin that is like them in nature and the sizes of their motes.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And from them come drops, and those that contain moisture similar to lemon juice.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And those that contain moisture similar to blood, and similar to them in nature; and those that are hard and dry.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the section of all of them, and in the extraction of those that do not cause pain, you should be careful with the extraction of those that do not cause harm.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation in the section of them is that you spray them with an instrument whose shape you apply appropriately at this point, which is called entomes, until you know that it contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	But if what it contains is moisture, then you should split it by section according to its length by a superficial section according to this form:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And you begin in the section of the line of B within the line of G. Since the moisture is drained, then you scrape that which contains that moisture, and do not leave any cause of all, because the others return if left of that cause.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And you should dip the cotton in Egyptian oil if it is present, and if not, in water and salt; and you fill that with water and leave it within itself for another day, because with water it corrodes all that is covered by that film.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And you should repeat the dip in Egyptian oil twice if it does not feel good to him with water, within that you trust that there was no cause of that film; then cure the plague with oil within that is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if the blister contains fat nodes, then you should cut it according to this form:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	with a shape of crotz, and you cut it between two lips of the section and scrape that completely from all sides, and you exert your strength in the extraction of the skin that contains it.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	But if your surgery causes pain, then first of all I will tell you.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And resembling, you make in the blister that it is lappified in the section and in the cure according to what I have told you; and the section of a lappified blister is lighter, because it is scarce of flesh and little moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And some times those blisters are more painful in the head of men to which there is no moisture at all; and that cause is because I cut on a blister in the head of an old woman and tore it so that it bled profusely, and if it had hit someone with a hard object, it would have been infected.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	But in the other blisters an accident in the head is not included in this chapter, as those blisters that come on children's heads and their roots are the ears, but the section of all these is a superficial section.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And the piercing of those from the top is lower than that from the bottom so that it is relieved the pain of the wound to the skin on the top.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	Then you should cure them with water that is necessary for the cure of him.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter .xii.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	Of the section of scrofulas that happen in the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	These blisters in the throat and neck and the shoulders are visible, and some times they happen in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that happen in the throat, and those motas that are born among them, and all scrofula of those is broken its own skin, and so with the nodes and blisters on the head, which we have mentioned.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	The sizes of these scrofulas are drops, because some of them are small and dry blisters, and those that contain moisture, and the evil ones which I do not obey for the cure of them.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Then in the one that you see of good disposition in the Treatment, of which the color of water that is revealed is similar to the color of the shoulder, and it is pleasant from all parts, and it does not stick to the nerves of the throat, or to the veins, or to the pain, and it is not thick, then you should cut it with a superficial section from the top to the bottom of the body part of the line of G. within the line of B., and scrape that completely, and take out two hairpins, or two oncis if there is need of them, as we have said in the blisters on the head, and extract it little by little.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is more careful that it is not cut the vein or nerve.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And be careful not to cut the vein or nerve. And if you cut the skin with a sharp instrument, and if it does not please you in your work, then pause at this point the pain of the blister, and bring out some blood from a vein or artery so that there is less pain, and start the blister again, and make it soft, and begin to be eaten.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the blood is cut off.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Then returns to your work within which you finish it.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And then you should ask the patient if there is any cause of the other small scrofula, and then cut them and clean them.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it is in the root of the scrofula, then you should not cut that scrofula from its root.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Then before cutting that with a sharp blade, and let it fall on the ground, and then if it falls on itself, it is no problem.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	And you should fill that with a young cotton that you have already dipped in Egyptian oil, and then cure it.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you cut that scrofula completely, then you should adjust the two lips of the blister and clean it as much as possible.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	But if you see that there is too much moisture on the scrofula because of its size, then you should cut the root of it, and then clean it and administer the stitch and water that is said.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And those scrofula that contain moisture, you should pierce them with a superficial piercing here where the growth of his hair appears, and pause the piercing of those water that is lower down in the body part, as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And you should administer the piercing, and similar to oil on those, so that it corrodes the water that is more than corrosion.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And then when you see that the blister has been cleaned, then you should cure it with oil of meat within that is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter .xiii.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	Of the section of the accidental blister on the forehead.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	They said that this section is an accident in the plague, and I did not see anyone in our town who had that disease.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	This is the inscription of the sermon of those.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	In men some may be inclined to the excreta of the epilottus, where it is avoided that the extract should come out by water, which is not done with care for all veins and most of the mallet are here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	In those who have blisters in the mouth or in the ear or both, if the mallet is not in the nose, it should be avoided from the section of epilottus to prevent loss which is done by perforation.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	So when we want water, let us inscribe the epilottus with three circles of the epilottus or four at small section for the height in this that it is between two circles by quantity, that the section is in ciphac, not in the cartilage, and this place is convenient to section, for it is deprived of meat and the vessels of saint of him are then.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor is little, it is customarily that he extend the ribbon of the ear with tenci, and then cut the ribbon inside so that it reaches to the canal, avoiding the vessels of saint if any cause.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And then inscribe the plug according to what we have described; and it is indicated on the section of the channel by the flame that is of him that is with water which is of his disromput and for the absence of the voice.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And leave the plug open for a while.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	So when the hour is remounted in which perforation is feared, add two lips of the plug of the plug, and cut that alone the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And then administer medicines that make the meat go well so that it is healed.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And Al-Buqaasis that the head of the sermon which we have described, presentation is not except that you see that some of these blisters have already opilated the ear of the mallet, and the mallet has come within death, and the rope of him is broken, and some go to inscribe the epiglottis so that he breathes the mallet over the place of the plug by some respiration, and is saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And through water I command that the plug be open until the evil of the mallet is consumed; and it is the evil of him by three days; and then the hour commands thus the plug, and heals that until it is healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And water that I see through my metys, is that a servant he hold a knife and cut it in his ear and inscribe one part of the cana of the lung, and I was called to the cure of him, and I left the mug on the same way as the mug of the moridos, and discovered the plug and left the saint which was yssit of the small plug.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	So you have confessed that it had not inscribed vein nor guidegi, and the wind left of the plug, and healed that within until it was cured.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And did not happen to the servant if not it has rawier in the voice, and then some days he returned to the improvement of his dispositions.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now I say that in the section of the epilottus there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 34.xliiv.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	Of section on the epilottus which happens in the ear far away, and it is called hernia of the ear.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This blister, named hernia of the ear, is a large one according to the color of the body, and it is in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it is according to two ways, for it is natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural one does not do to heal.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental one is according to two ways of which one is similar to nodes grass, and the other way is similar to blister which is made by nodection of an artery, and in this one is fear.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And it should not be that you make a presumption to him as if it were a small thing.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you will not make a presumption to him as if it were a small thing. And if you see that it is similar to nodes grass, and it is not suspended to any of the veins, then you cut that one there with the knife, and extract it with water which contains it from the flesh and the bursiclam; and if not, then search all his being, and then cure the place with water which is customarily used for healing, within that it is healed.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 35.xliv.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	Of section of the nodules.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	The nodules are a type of node, and I have already said all the types of them in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And it is customarily that I describe this difference between node and exiture with care.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	So you say that the exiture has quality and fever and violent pains within that it is soothed by the boil of the superfluity; and the completion is putrefaction which the hour stops the fever, the pain and the heat.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	In men, however, a node does not have quality or fever or pain, and it is counted as if it were a small lion which is in the nose and throat.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And it is according to the color of the body, and the beginning of it is like a swelling and does so if it were a small swelling with water, and the colors of the water are little ones, according to what I have said in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	So when you approach the cure of a node, ask that one and investigate that beginning with the instrument which is called an intramuscular, according to how it comes in the chapter which is near this.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And it is a way of inquiry of blisters and all the nodes, and it is because you take this instrument and introduce it into the place which is more humid that you suspect in the blister, and you will turn the tools little by little until you know that the instrument has already penetrated the ribbon.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And then finish your hand according to the measurement of the size of the blister, and then extract the intramuscular and consider that it is done in the trace of it.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the water has been lost from its current, of whatever color it is, then you inscribe it in a superficial section according to what I have said in other blisters.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if there is not water from the intramuscular trace, then you know that it is fat.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And dry on it in a section which does not have a form of a crust according to this shape:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	As I taught you, and suspend that one with nails, and extract the ribbon of all parts with ease, and keeps the flesh or hernia, if you can, on that one; and extract that vein with the node.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	In men, if it is torn in the operation, it is not possible to extract that vein, and there are little vessels in which it is torn; and then you extract them with care within that it does not harm anyone.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	For if it does not hurt anyone, little or much, the node returns according to what is customarily used.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you think that it has hurt a little part of him, then completely close the plug of some corrosive and sharp powders, and press the plug on that one which is an epilottus, and cures that one with another cure within that it is healed.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if it is a large node, then you cut the two lips of him and heal that one with water which contains it.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	In men, if the pulse of the vein is to him opposite, or not-pulsatile, then you cut and plug the place where it hurts, three times a day until it can be healed, and returns to inscribe that water which is torn from the node.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter .xlvi.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	On the instruments necessary in section and perforation.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Of the three shapes of the instruments, one is large, another is medium, and another is small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The large instrument shape is this:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The medium instrument shape is this:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The small instrument shape is this:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	If the instrument is made of iron, of ivory, or of the sharp ends of feathers, so that the instrument fits well into the apertures.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are the shapes of the instruments, and they are called albed, and one of them is called beri.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	Of three shapes, for one is large, another is medium, and another is small.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The large shape of the instrument, form of L:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The medium shape of the instrument, form of λ:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The small shape of the instrument, form of l:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	Let it be known that they are for those apertures and incisions and fistulas and abscesses, so that among them some are of the bones and others are of other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And some are curved, thick, and pointed, such as large needles, which are sewn with linen thread, and they are made of brass, or of iron, or of silver; and the most common ones are made of brass.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And the instruments of black feathers are made, that it is known that through them the fistulas in the concavity of which are reflected, are reflected by their own levitation on those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	Of three shapes, for some of them are long, and others are medium-length, and others are short, according to the amount of the width of the fistula and the tightness of λ.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	The large shape of the instrument of lead:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	The medium shape of the instrument of lead:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	The small shape of the instrument of lead:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The shapes of the needles are of various kinds, for some of them are simple, each with a single curve, and they are three kinds: large, small, and medium-sized.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	They are needle-like, and they are three in number.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And some needles have two curves, and they are three in number.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And some needles have three curves, and they are also three in number.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	All of these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	The large single shape of the needle, form of L:
Forma de unci simple migier:	The medium single shape of the needle, form of λ:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	The small single shape of the needle, form of L:
Forma de unci orp gran:	The large needle-like shape, form of L:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	The medium needle-like shape, form of λ:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	The small needle-like shape, form of L:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	The large needle shape with two curves:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	The medium needle shape with two curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	The small needle shape with two curves:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	The large needle shape with three curves:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	The medium needle shape with three curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	The small needle shape with three curves:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the shapes of the scalpels with which the knots and apertures are cut and punctured, and they are three in number, for one is large, another is medium, and another is small.
Forma de scapel gran:	The large scalp shape:
Forma del scapel migier:	The medium scalp shape:
Forma de scapel pauc:	The small scalp shape:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The extremities of those with which section is made are sharp, and the other extremities are not-sharp, and they are not stopped in such a way, but rather that it is made smooth in order to heal the wound of incising a vein or a nerve, and because of this it heals well the wound of an abscess.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the shapes of the ointments, and they are three in number: large, medium, and small, as follows:
La forma de magda gran:	The large shape of the ointment:
Forma de magda migier:	The medium shape of the ointment:
Forma de magda pauc:	The small shape of the ointment:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	If it is made of iron, and it appears similar to rayon by means of a solution containing alcohol.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	It is in the sharp side pointed with a covered edge, and on the inner and outer sides, when desired, it has vits.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The shapes of the spatulas, which are placed between the teeth so that the perforation of the abscesses does not affect the teeth, and they do not affect the taste, and they are three in number: large, medium, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the forms of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The shapes of the wands with which the flow of blood is stopped, and they are three in number: large, medium, and small; form of L:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	If it is made of iron, round in shape and of a certain length, and it is thin.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	It is said that these are the shapes of the wands, large, medium and small, in order that through them the flow of blood may be stopped at a fast pace, and then, upon first use, it is not medicine.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, they do not use them to stop the blood from flowing throughout the body, but only at the carotid arteries, the armpits, the breast-lids, and the navel, resembling the latter in shape to the former.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	Some small instruments are made in this way; and by this shape the blood is stopped when made with a scalpel or an incision of a vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	Some wands are made round according to this shape:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter .xlix.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	On the treatment of male breasts, which are assembled from women.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some wands are inflated with air the breasts of men who have been covered by a blanket, and when they fall asleep, they are inflated, and the breasts of women are assembled, and we do not know which is which.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you wish to cut those by means of lunar section according to this shape, from the line B to the line G, and then cut off the whole grotesque, and then apply the medicine to the ulcer, and then join together the two lips of the ulcer, and heal it.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if the breast declines to the right side and is softened by its magnitude when placed against the breast of a woman, then cut it in two halves, like a moon, and join them together, so that each half contains a portion of the other, and then join them again, so that the line between them is straight, and from this shape draw the line B and the line G. And then cut off the grossness, and then apply the medicine to the ulcer, and then join together the two lips of the ulcer, and heal it.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not please the incision of that which is covered with a blanket, and with the flow of blood, then apply to it an ingredient of an acid solution, and leave it until it is cured of the ulcer, and then cut off what has been corroded by the acid, which is smooth from the grossness, and then heal what remains.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter .xlix.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	On the perforation of abscesses that come from below.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	Those abscesses that come from below are of three kinds of scrofulae: severe ones, moderate ones, and mild ones.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And some of them contain moisture; and those that contain moisture are cut with lunar section according to this figure: from the line G to the line B. And when all the fluid has been removed from the ulcer, then add a mixture of coto and water, and leave it until the next day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And let the wound remain there and be cleansed well with water until it is healed.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the swelling of the joints and nodos is, and that of the scrofula, then you should cut into it with a scalpel as we have said in the section on scrofula by sectioning it transversely.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	And if the plague is extended on a foot that has become gangrenous, then administer cauterization as we have said before.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter .xlix.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	Of sectioning of abscesses that happen by artery or vein.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an artery is broken and the clot is consolidated that is over that one, then watch out for abscesses: for it is known that inflammation and abscess occur through the artery or vein: indeed, when the abscess is due to an artery, it is long and located in the part of the body where the vessel runs; and when you cut into the abscess with a knife, you can hear a squeaking sound.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And that which is due to a vein is round about the neck of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And sectioning of such abscesses is wrong, and most often in the area that leaves the aysselhas (groins), and the armpits, and the throat, and other places of the body; and it is very bad, since the cure with iron must be avoided, and if it is on the extremities or on the head, it should be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	But over that which is due to an inflammation of the orifice of the artery, cut it transversely in length; and then open the section with a hook and free the artery, and uncover the area.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And then place a needle over that one and let it pierce into the other side, and make the artery turn twice on itself in two places, -- which causes a person to get double hernia in the temple area from two arteries.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And then pierce the place between two ligaments with a spike until the whole thing comes out, and let the abscess be dissolved.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then administer a cure that generates poison within, so that the ligaments do not come out; and then heal it well with water until it is healed.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if it is an abscess due to the sectioning of a vein, then you should hold your hand so that it is above the possible place of the abscess with the knuckle, and then open the section with a needle from the place where you are holding your hand, and let the needle pierce; and make the double thread go around in two places according to what I said to you about the ligament of an apple of two parts to two extremities of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	If you are afraid that the thread will come out, then open the section with a needle first and then let the needle pierce; and make four ligatures of the threads.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Then dry the abscess in its own place until water comes out of it, and then cut off the excess of the clot, and let the fluid that comes out from it dry up.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then place over it a sponge that you have immersed in oil and vinegar, and then administer the cure with water and oil until it is healed.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Chapter L of the abscess that happens due to nerve twisting.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	As it is due to an artery or a vein, and also apparently due to excessive work, and somewhat similar to that which occurs from blows.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	It is done from above in the places of the auxiliaries or the head, or at any place where joints are joined together.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And it is a difficult abscess, and it resembles the color of the other part of the body, and when it becomes hot due to heat, you can feel the patient's fever.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And it is not an abscess that forms in the middle of the body, and therefore the clot remains there, and it affects both parts evenly, neither before nor behind.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, of those that are at the joints, it is not known to be due to iron, since it would go against nature.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	But over the head or forehead it is with a spike.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	But if it is a small abscess, then cut it off at the roots.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is large, then hang it with a chain and let it dry out, and then cut it off; and sew up the area, and heal it well until it is healed.
Capitol .li.	Chapter L.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	Of sectioning of an abscess that occurs from the mouth to the belly.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	And let the men who have this problem be given the herb garlic in their food and in their drink; for it is similar to those that resemble mushrooms, of which the roots are thin and the head is large; and let the lips of these people be treated, and let them be from those that are small, and let them be from those that are large.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I have seen one, and in its belly there were two mushrooms that seemed like fungi, and there was no difference between those white ones, with thin roots.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And the lips of these people were turned upside down, and moisture flowed from them all the time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	So you cut those open and sewed up the other one from above, and there were eighteen teeth in it. and the other had only one tooth.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And the operation of cutting them is that you consider if the patient' water is hot, and the color of their skin is white, moist, with thin roots; then open them up with a hook, and let them be in your presence, for it will expel half of them; and if they are given to you, cauterize them.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if the patient is a little bit frightened and worried, refrain from cutting with iron; but then let there be plucked fresh lead, and hold it to the part that I have described; and let it rest for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	Then tighten the string of lead; and then, if it does not cut, it is difficult work.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	But if the lead is of thick roots, then there is no cause for fear or worry in cutting it up, and most of all in that which is in the belly.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	It may be that you cut the larger one of them, and then cauterize it so that it does not grow back.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	Then heal that area so that the plague is healed.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And beware that you do not cut up lead that has a dark color, and little feeling, and that looks like cancer.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And I have remembered this warning.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter LII.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	Of cure of the umbilical hernia.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	Umbilical hernia is caused by various reasons: or because of tears in the skin that covers it, and whether there is a bud there as well as other ruptures; or because of blood flowing from a vein or artery as to what happens before it, or because of constriction of breath in it.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	If it is due to tears in the skin and the bud coming out of it, then the color of the abscess resembles that of the body; and it is difficult pain, and it appears in different places.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	If it is due to the bud coming out, then its place is opposite from what I have told you, with a different degree of heat, and when you push it with your hand, it retreats; and it becomes very hot inside, and there are many different movements in it.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	May it be that by moisture, it is hard to press your hand without pain, nor is it forced or felt.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it is because of heat, then these signs appear as a dark blush on the skin.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	May it be that not of meat, then there is a hard, thick and durable apoplexy, and it remains according to the amount.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	May it be that by wind, then touch from him is painful.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation in it is that you should consider if the prominence of the navel is because of heat from fire or blood, or wind; then cover so that you are forbidden to cure it, for in this there is fear and dread as I have taught in the chapter where I said about apoplexy by fire and blood.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the prominence of the navel is because of the intestine or hernia, then command the malady that he has his ale (urine) on him, and let him stand extended; and with your hand touch around the whole navel, and command him to stay facing between your two legs, and with a sharp instrument touch lightly around the navel in the place where you have touched it; and extend most of the apoplexy to the hair roots around it by means of an oil or lye suitable.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	Then break the apoplexy that is extended on the member and insert the finger into that spot where you have touched it, and seek the intestine; and if you cannot reach it by means of the member, then pull it with force and push the intestine to the insides of the belly.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have reached the hernia, then take that one with a finger; and cut away its excesses.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	May it be contrary to your fire or blood, then touch that point again, and return to your operation; and take two needles and place them in those two strings strongly and insert the two needles into the path which you have made around the apoplexy by means of a knot, which should pass through it; and then tighten the apoplexy in four parts around the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you want, remove the needles and leave the place within that it may heal by itself, or cut away that part when it has thinned out and then treat that with water that heals within that it is cured.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the prominence of the navel is because of nothing but meat or moisture, then you should cut away the apoplexy as I have said before and destroy heat or moisture, which you find in it, and then treat that with water that heals within and solidifies that place.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 3.li.
De curacio de cranc.	Of the Treatment of Fractures.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have said, in the division, of the different kinds of fractures and in what way they are treated with medicines, and that they heal quickly if not ulcerated; and we have said that a fracture is generated in the greatest care for the treatment of it.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And they say that some small fractures are in places where it is possible to eradicate them, as when the fracture is in the breasts or the crotch and similar parts of the members, especially when it is just beginning.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	May it be that it is old and big, then do not try to treat it, for I have not seen how it can heal of itself, nor have I ever seen one arrive at water.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation in it is that you go first and leave the patient and purify some portions with black cholera, and then mend those who are deformed by the apoplexy if they are obviously deformed.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	Then prepare the patient with the preparation in which he is located for the operation, and then give him an emetic with strong emetic properties within that it does not disturb any cause of its wounds.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And let the wound run its course, and do not disturb that leeching, and squeeze the places, and wash the blood away with your hand or with an instrument suitable for your purpose.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	May it be contrary to your strong wound of fire or blood, then cauterize that within that the flow of the wound stops, and then treat that with the other treatment within that it is healed.
Capitol .liv.	Chapter 4.li.
De curacio de ydropici.	Of the Treatment of Hydropic Disease.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already recommended, in the division, of the different kinds of hydropic disease of water, and the signs of each kind, for the treatment of it with medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	That which is cured with iron is only the species of algorism alone, and it does not approach iron to the species of tympany or the species of hyposarcasm, because water is deadly.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have already treated this species of hydropic disease with medicine and do not understand your treatment, then know that if the patient has been cured or has another hydropic disease, as when it is coughing or colicky, similar to those, then keep away from iron, for there is danger about water.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	May it be that you find the patient very useful, and only has hydropic disease, not child or old age, then the method of operation for him is that you raise the patient between your two legs, and the servant raises his hand over the area to press on the navel with his hand, pushing water out from the bottom of the penis, and then take a sharp instrument according to this form:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	is made up of two sharp ends, one at each end as long as a fingernail, but it is to be done little by little so that in the operation you do not pass into the hernia, and then put on it.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And you should consider if the generation of hydropic disease is because of the intestine, for then it is necessary that you move away from the navel by three fingers on each side, in the right place above the penis.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	May it be that the generation of hydropic disease is because of the illness of the child, then your section should be to the left of the navel by three fingers.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the generation of it is because of itself, then your section should be on the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And do not say that your section is over the rib on which you want to operate the patient so that the excesses do not run to that place.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	Then pierce the instrument completely through, and then insert it into that section, and raise your hand with the blade between the two halves of the blade, and then squeeze it; and if the quantity is a little less than a fingernail.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	Then pierce the cypher so that it comes out of the blade into the desired place, and it is a place of water.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Then remove it and insert an instrument which has this form:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	is made of thin silver tube; it is made of silver or lead or brass, and at the end is a small loop, and on its sides are three loops: two from one end and one from the other end; and it is finished with a sharp edge according to the feather shape, sometimes like this:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	In the end of it is a sturdy loop, for when the instrument reaches water, then let it run back on the instrument halfway, because if you do not take away from it as much as it runs away, then you will give to the patient the resolution of his spirit animal, or bring him near to death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	Here comes the first sentence to translate. Do not add any comments, like "here is the translation", just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	Then extract the instrument and retain the water that causes this as much as it is retained by the ligature that retains the thread that runs over the knot on which you are told to perform that second technique in that way.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And then repeat the instrument the next day if the patient tolerates water, and extract a small amount of water, and make it stay for some days on suspicion, and guard against error until it doesn't retain the water but a little bit.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	If you fear for the patient, and let go of a lot of water, then do so that it is buried in sand, and make a bath with soap, and wait under the sun for a long time; and cure him with desiccating medicines unless he is healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And then cauterize over the stomach, and the instrument is removed from water, according to what I have told you that it is preceded.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter .lv.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	Of the cure for children who are born with the holes of the urine not perforating.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Some are born with the head of the child's mixture not perforating (or is straight through or isn't in its place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, when treating the perforation of wine so often as it is born with a subtle motion according to this form:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And then place on the thread a small lead nail and bind it, and you for three days or for .iiii.three.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when he wants to urinate, he gets up and urinates; and then return it.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	If you don' stop the lead, it is possible that the urine that goes over the place, doesn' allow this closure.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	If the thread on which you are working is straight, then treat it with a lead nail as I have said, for several days unless it is increased.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	If the thread on which you are working is not in its place, it is because of this that the one who is born with it, and the thread is the end of the penis, so that he cannot urinate at the back, unless he raises the penis to the front; and it is not a generation, because the sperm cannot arrive at the mother according to its rectitude, and it is bad in a subtle way.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	And the way of performing it on him is that the patient be laid on his back, and the head of his penis be extended with your left hand to facilitate its extraction, and incise the tip of the penis at the place of the perineum with a sharp knife, or that you shave some hair, so that the edge of his penis looks like the head of it, and so that the thread falls into its place according to what has been said.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And guard that in your surgery of the flow of the blood, because it is because you work; and pause with him until the blood stops flowing, and cure the plague unless he is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter .lvi.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	Of the cure for the enlargement of the foreskin on the penis and its corruption, blackness, and adherence of the foreskin to the head of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Are seen with this swelling on the penis and is an eminence of flesh that is dark.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And from this one is malicious and another is not-malicious.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	Not-malicious, stop it with a small amount of a subtil medicine and cut off that part unless it is completely cured; then dip it in Egyptian ointment; and then dip it every day in a refined ointment unless he is healed.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the swelling is malicious, of its color, then stop it that you administer a pointed cautery to the incisions and to the rasping of it.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	If the swelling is in the foreskin on the head of the penis, and one part of it is inside the foreskin and another part is outside of it, then stop it that you hold the swelling which is inside at the beginning unless it is consolidated; and then treat that which is outside, because when you treat that whole, it isn' guaranteed that it won' be torn.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And are seen with the genitals and the foreskin becoming black and corrupted, then stop it that you conquer all of it that has already become dark and is beginning to rot or has rotted; and then dip it in water that is mixed with flour from a black radish and with three parts of salt and crushed.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And then cure him with the other cure unless he is healed.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	If there is a flow of blood, then administer a lunar cautery according to this form:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	Because a lunar cauterization that is made in two different places, because it is a cure for the flow of blood and for the corruption of the plague.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the penis is corroded and is destroyed entirely in the hour, then stop it that you introduce a lead tube into its meat through which the patient urinates through that one.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adhesion does not occur unless it is circumcised; and when it occurs because of the plague or because of a abscess), then extract with a sharp knife within that it is dissolved the ligament and the head of the penis is completely released.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to cut out those accurately, then stop it that you extract with a sharp knife the head of the penis and the foreskin, and so it is because the foreskin, when it is subtle, is easily pierced by its subtlety.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And then separate between the foreskin and the head of the penis with a small lead, which is already melted in water by scrubbing so that it doesn' adhere anymore.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And then it should be cured with vi stiptic unless it is consolidated.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter  .lvii.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	Of the cleaning of children and the cure for the swelling that occurs in those who are circumcised.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution of continence as it does with other plagues: but because it is part of our work and our will, and its benefits are primarily for the children, it is necessary that we assign this best operation and less painful way to save them from peril.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	So I say that the youths do not say in some of their laws, because they don' use them in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired through experience that this causes me to be amazed at most of the artisans and barbers using circumcision and purification with a sharp knife and an incision; and they use a ligament with a needle.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And I have tried all these ways and did not find a better purification than with scissors, a sharp knife in the purification with an incision, because it moves the cord over it, because the cord of the foreskin has two tunics, and the tight one is left behind, and the strong one forces another incision and pain certainly.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And the purification that is done by the sharp knife, and it is done with a finger, which is used by the barbers, is not safe to make an incision at the end of the penis member, because it is strongly inserted into the thread on which you are working.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	If in the operation with a knife, firmly avoid hurting yourself and corrupting your work.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the child's cord is short by nature, and twines in such a way that there is no need of cutting it, and I have seen this.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	More about the cutting that is done with scissors and threads, I learned this because the scissors are of proportional incision, for in such way as the keenness that is used is also so; and therefore when you press your hand with proportional two sharpnesses and cut it according to a comparison at one time; and is made a compression of the cord to a contorted shape of all starting, on which no mistake of all.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the manner of the first operation is that you let the child rest mostly if it is of those who understand a small, that you do not cut but that you tie the cord to its hock only, and that you let it rest until another day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	Then make him happy in all this manner that is at your possibility of what that receives his intelligence.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And then make him sit between your two arms firmly prepared, and don't get dizzy; and hide the scissors in your hand or hold them on his foot, that the child doesn't see those nor anyone of the instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And then put your hand on the child' hock and blow into the cord, and pull that which is gathered up on the hock's head, and cut it off from what is attached to it with filthiness.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And then put the cut location marked by the cord double, and then tie with two threads this small part of another thread, and then hold it well and place the tip of the other thread at the right place, and cut between two threads.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then raise the cord gently and strip off the hock's head; and then let the sand run little by little, for it is better so; and then put dust on it and over the dust put a cloth that is wet with fresh rose water; and then make him sit until another day; and treat him with the cure until he is cured.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The shape of the scissors for cutting, this is the shape:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	If the end of one blade is not sharp and the other is, so that the edge of the hook is not cut, and the length of the two sharpnesses is so with the length of two hands clasped together.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	More about the mistake in cutting is that a very strong pain flees all the internal cord, or broken from it; you must cut it.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	And therefore when you extend that from your hand to your elbow in front of the incision' place and cut it according to equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it with your thumb, then take it with your index finger and cut it.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	More about if they have passed three days, and then make him that is swollen with the hock' injury rest; and then let him sit until he is cured with ease, and cut it according to what you prepare.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And keep the child's head away from him, for it will not be good for him.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And therefore treat that child with water that solidifies the plague of the dust that we have described in the treatise of the dusts.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if the cord is cut too much above measure, and you obey the cuts too much, then it will not be felt.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	More about the treatment of that child with water that we have said to be cured.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter LXVIII.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	Of Treatment for Retained Urine in the Bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction due to fear or a cold shower, or from bad food or dirty meat, and similar to those that we have said about the methods of treatment in the division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not dissolved, and if the bladder' trouble is caused by a cold that has already reached its neck, then make the patient lie on his back.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	And then make the child's feet touch each other, and extend his stomach by pulling it down from his ribs as much as is possible for him.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Then make the neck of the bladder tighten so that it expels the urine by pushing from behind, so that it is completely emptied.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if the urine is not dissolved with water that we have said to be effective for the cause in the patient, then make a syringe of silver and thin leather, so as the tube of pen of goose quill is of long length in similarity to a palm and half, which is the thin canal at its tip.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the manner of introducing urine into the patient is that you tie the cord double and place it in the end of the leather or skin for a good hold; and then introduce the cord' ends into the tube' end, and cut with scissors if there is any surplus cause of the leather, more introduce it into the tube with force; and then put the tube on the patient' neck and fill it with water.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And then make the child sit on a pillow, and put the bladder of him over his back and the hock with water and oil.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	And then introduce the tube with ease until it touches the hock' root; and then double the hock up from behind at the bend; and then make the tube touch that which goes to the bladder, and this should be done if there is no cause found, but it is put into him because of the urgency.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And then take the cord away from the leather slowly, for urine causes the leather to contract.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Then make him go pee, and use a syringe, don't stop making water with the syringe until the bladder is emptied and the patient is relieved.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter LIX.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	Of Quality of Bladder' Clamping with a Clencher and Similar Instruments.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the bladder' ulcer or blister occurs, or is cut, and wants to distil water and medicine in it, then use an instrument called a clencher, and this is its form: Si non hay desus le malaute, no fayt. E si es dolores per poyre o por carnada, lahoras fai curacio per urina retenguda en la vesica, e non fayt.
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	If there is no sound from the patient, then he is silent; and if it is closed, then it is sealed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that one three holes: two of a single hole, and then twice.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	At the beginning is a tight place, in which water is trapped, and then according to the quantity that has been trapped there, add as much more as the cause is drawn from the humors, so it is thrown away, and when it is expelled, throw it with water, and when it is expelled far away, according to how a clencher is used in the ship battles of the sea.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	So when you want to introduce moisture into the bladder, make the end of the clencher touch the moisture, and then throw it with water that is forced out, for the moisture is thrown out in the clencher' hole.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And then introduce the end of the clencher in the hock according to what we have described in the syringe; and then throw with water that throws it, for that moisture goes into the hock' hole, and then it is thrown into the bladder as well; and the patient should be relieved.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The shape of the thin clencher with which the bladder is clenched, and this is its form: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en la cap de lu.
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And be made of silver or lead, which is shaped like a small feather, and placed carefully inside it.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	Then take a bladder from a sheep or cow, and place the moisture you want to crystallize inside it, and tie that between two strong iron rings together with a double knot, and heat that moisture over fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	Then insert the end of the crystallization into the pipe.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	Then place your hand over the bladder with the moisture you want to stretch and heat until it reaches the bladder, so that the patient can feel that moisture has entered the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	If you do not have a bladder, take a goat or sheep bladder and make it into a circle; pierce that completely; then insert a strong ring tightly in those holes, so that they spin; then add the circle so that it is attached to it, since you pause on that water which you want to separate, and smell and pour.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	Then tie that in the instrument and make it so that you attach it to the bladder, and express your hand into which the moisture will enter into the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Chapter 60.
De extraccio de peyra.	Of extraction of stone.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already spoken about the types of stone and their cures, and the difference between stone formed in the kidneys and stone formed in the bladder, and the signs of each.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	We have also spoken about the stone that requires surgery and cauterization.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	The stone formed in the bladder itself is that which is lodged in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And I will now present those with manifest explanation and abbreviation.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore say that the stone formed in the bladder mostly appears in children; and from the signs of it is that the urine passed from the bladder is similar to water in its fineness, and appears in sand; and the bladder rubs its edge, and motes appear, and is drawn out; and there is a stinging sensation.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	It is easy to cure children of that disease before they reach twelve years, but difficult to treat it in the old.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	But in young people it is half-cured by water, since it is between those ages.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And of that age at which the stone is larger and the cure easier; and if it is small, it is opposite to that.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore, at the beginning of the cure of that disease, cover with a crystal of lead those parts that are affected; for that crack allows the entry of the stone, which some people prevent by applying oil to it.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	Then take the lead with the patient's feet and tie it tightly and gently burn it until it enters the bladder opening, or jump from place to place.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	Then make a cut between your hands and the patient' bladders are apart, so that the entire bladder is hanging down from its sides.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	Then turn it over and all of it upside down.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	Therefore, if you feel the stone in the space, then immediately cut off that part with a sharp cut.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you do not cut off all of it with a sharp cut, then cover it with oil from the left hand side; if it is a child, or from the middle if it is a grown-up person, and insert that into its rectum.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	Then turn it over until the stone has fallen out of its own accord.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And turn that small by small towards the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	Then press on that part with your finger and expel it from its sides; find out where you made the cut.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And order the minister to press his hand over the bladder; and order another minister with his right hand to stretch the genitals at their sides, and on the left hand to tie a string where they are cut off.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Then insert a spatum that does not hurt; this is the way of it:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	and cut it in two with the spatum between the buttocks and the genitals, not at the middle, going back from the left side of the crotch; and make that cut over the stone and the testicle, or if you want to make a transverse cut, so that the cut is wide outside and tight inside according to the amount of stone that has been passed, and no more, since the testicles are easily injured when they are cut from behind.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	You know that there is no stone in which it does not hurt; therefore its extraction by water is difficult.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And of that water is like a nut, and is round, and is not easily extracted.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	Therefore if it is the stone that does not hurt, insert it into the crevice.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not like that, then cover it with a thin cloth, or press it gently, so that the end of it does not slip away; or insert a small and curved instrument into it.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	If you cannot handle it, then increase the tension slightly, and if you see a flow of blood, cut off with vinegar that is three times boiled.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	If the stone is larger than a pea, at the beginning press your hand into the opening of the bladder, and cut off; then press a small string onto it; and, seemingly, if there are more than two motes, make the cuts smaller.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	If the stone is very large, ignorance is your friend; for two things happen to the bladder: either it passes away, or it becomes stuck because of continuous urine flow; indeed, the location is not completely solid.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	But administer by expulsion from within it if it does not come out; or insert a sharp instrument to extract the stone in pieces.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Therefore when you have completed your operation, then fill the mouth with aloe enemas and dragon's blood, and bind it up.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	Then place an oil cloth over the patient, or rub with rosin and water, or with rosewater and salt water, so that it may swell.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	Then turn the patient around, so that the bladder is hanging down from its neck, and do not remove the ligature for three days.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when you have removed the ligature, bathe that part in water and oil, and cure it with a solution of iodine and bacillus within three days.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	But if in the wound there is swelling due to coldness and pain, as if it were frozen; and if urine cannot pass from the bladder due to the stone (for it is known that such a thing causes the bladder to rot and putrefy), then insert the testicle into the wound, since it causes the bladder to drain.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then wash that part with rosewater, water and salt; and in opposition to all this, with water that is known to be useful for the cure within three days.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	So you will understand how to treat those who are ill and to administer medicines, which are placed on the affected parts;
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	If the stone is small and is lodged in the meat of the bladder, and it is stuck there; if urine cannot pass due to that stone, then administer an enema with water that has been boiled three times before it reaches the bladder, since ten veguadas by this cure are considered a cut; and I have already warned you about a perforator of iron, from which this is the form of it:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	from the triangular extremities, taken, fixed in a post.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	Then take hold firmly, and place your hand on that one, so that it does not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	Then insert the iron into the shaft, piercing easily into so that the piercer comes out at that place.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	Then rotate the piercer in your hand at that small place little by little, and you will pierce the piercing from both sides so that it does not go through; for urine is then discharged completely.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	Then place your hand over that which is round on the edge of the part from which the shaft emerges, for that is wrinkled, and it is through there that the urine passes, and the patient is cured.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	But if this cure does not suit you for some reason that prevents it from working on you, then take hold of one with your hand from below, and another above the wound.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	Then cut across that place in the shaft between two strips.
E aprop extratz aquela.	Then take out that one.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	Then remove the ligature and clean the wound with water.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And it is not necessary to hold the shaft from below so that it does not return to the bladder, but rather, so that it does not leave its cavity; for when the hold on the shaft is released, the fluid returns to its place and inflames the wound.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And it is necessary for you to hold the shaft from above when you cut, so that you lift up the edge above, or that the fluid returns to its place, and thus inflames the wound; then you can say what has been said.
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter LXVI.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	On the removal of a woman's bladder.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	The bladder in the woman's body is generated little by little.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	But if you have a bladder with any of those diseases, the cure for it is difficult, and some unusual methods are required.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	The first one is that the woman is strong and her bladder is large.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second reason is that you do not find a woman who can expose her bladder when she drinks, or one who has had children.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third reason is that you have not taught this skill to women, primarily because of the operation with your hand.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth reason is that the place of incision on a woman' bladder is far from the place where the bladder lies, so as not to injure it with your knife; and in that place there is danger.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	But if necessity compels you to do this, then know that you take a woman with a full bladder, and it is a risk for her.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	But if you lack that one, then seek out another woman who is subtle and skilled, or present a married woman who has given birth to a child in the custom of women, or a woman for this skill, as this is the way of women.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Then bring that one forward, and order her to do whatever you command, from the examination of the bladder to the start of the procedure; for this is how it should be: if the woman is strong, then let her place her foot and hold her bladder.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Then if she obstructs that one, remove her from her position, and order her to cut into it.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	But if she is not strong, then order the married woman to place her foot in the cavity of the bladder and cut into it; for she places her hand over the bladder, and cuts with care.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Then if she obstructs that one, then know that it is gradual and difficult to reach the bladder through her opening, reaching from above her navel towards the corner of the thigh; for it is in that place that the fluid collects.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	Then cut across that place of the leg where the bladder is located from above, so that it does not move back into its cavity; for it will not be able to return if it remains in place.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	The incision should be little at first; and then cut into that place, and if you feel the bladder, then make the incision deeper according to the quantity that you know is inside the bladder.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And you should know that there are different kinds of bladder fluid: some is small and hard, others are large and sharp, some long and round, and some have edges.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Then you should know how many kinds of bladder fluid there are for each person; for in the water that they drink there is a different kind of fluid.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you want to find the source of the fluid, adjust in the virious place and collect it for an hour until it stops flowing; then return to your operation before the bladder is emptied.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And prepare yourself with the instruments that it mentions in the removal of a bladder from a man, so that you may be helped by them in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you want to find the source of the fluid, and you know that the exit of the fluid is in the arceria that is cut, then pause with dust over that place, and pour it there with a funnel and tighten it tightly; do not repeat that water, for she will die if you empty her.
E aprop cura la plagua.	Then heal the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	Then as the sharpness of the pain subsides, you can adjust in place; then return to your operation before the bladder is emptied.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter LXII.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	On incision on a hernia.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	Hernia is nothing more than an addition of moisture to the white cloth that contains the bow; it is called chiffonade.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And some veils are in the proper pannus that nature has prepared for the opening of the bow, until it is time to cut it, and it is another bow; and the edge is the edge of the genitive between the chiffonade. And it is not water but blood.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is by an injury to the genitive, so that it is discharged from there, and sometimes a hit is made on the genitives.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this moisture does not have different colors, for the color of it is yellowish or reddish or purplish, or is black and frothy, or is clear and fresh water, and that is what you call.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which this addition of water can be known: for if it is in the chiffonade that we have spoken about, then the bulge is round and declining a little towards the length, so that it appears like a figure of a bow, and shows the genitive, since the moisture contains it from all parts.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the moisture is in the proper pannus, then the bulge is round and extends from the opening of the bow, and so one judges that it is another bow.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the moisture is between the edge of the genitive and the chiffonade, then let there be a stop to it.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And if you wish to know the color of the moisture in the bulge, then examine the color of the moisture in the middle of its shape; and according to the color that is discharged from it, judge whether it is blood or not.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	Then when we come to the cure for it by ironing, then know that you order the patient to drink something hot if water is possible for you, and wet his clothes completely.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	Then it should be placed on its back for some little cause, and leave it there for a moment, and then take off the cloth.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	Then place yourself on the left side of the patient, and order the minister to follow your lead with his right hand, which extends his arm to one of the two sides of the genitive edge and to the opening of the miracle of the womb.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And let him take a spatula of lead and cut the tendon behind the knee from top to bottom at a depth of one-quarter inch.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And be made the section according to the right method evenly distant from the line that you should take the peel of the tendons, before reaching the white of the ankle in all its extent.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And cut off that, and observe, and keep for this that you do not injure that; and your cutting off from the beginning cut down so that it is suspended with two fingers and gently scrape the cutting off according to the quantity which can be done for you.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	Then pierce the ankle bone with a wide piercing, and extract all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	Then separate between the two lips of the section with nails, and extend the ankle bone at its ends; and do not touch the tendon behind the knee in its entirety, and cut off the ankle in that way which is to you possible.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And cut off that with its entirety or in pieces, and most importantly his little bone, for if you do not examine the cutting of him, it is not sure that the water does not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	But if you take the bone of him from that side of his tendon in the hour of your operation, then when you have finished the cutting off of the ankle bone, return it inside, and then join together the two lips of the tendon behind the knee with sutures, and then heal those too as others within so that it is healed.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you see that the bone is corrupted by another illness, then know that you should clean up the vessels which are hanging from the suspension, and extract the bone, and then heal it with water which I have said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	But if the water is gathered in two parts, then know that they are hernias; therefore cut off that part according to what you have made in the other likewise; and if it seems to you that it is an operation, then do it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And then you clean up the wound, and immerse it in oil or rose water; and place another cloth on the inside which you have dipped in vinegar and oil, and spread out that over the two tendons and the wonder of the belly; and place folded cloths and powders, and lay those on according to this form:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	And then place two cloths and be humped with wool according to this form; and be put on the extremities which are pressed by a belt or by wet wool, and be gathered together under the corset of the braies, and one extremity take between the thighs within so that it is joined with the other, and the second extremity take at the part of the crotch, and two extremities take between two cushions and two extremities take over two legs, and all tightened be placed in the corset of the braies.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And some of these hernias are treated by artificial cauterization instead of cutting; and it is because you take cauterization with a sharp knife and cut off the tendon behind the knee, and burn according to what we have told you so that the white ankle bone containing the water is uncovered, and then you take cauterization according to this form:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	And it is put together in the Greek letter.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And then pierce the ankle bone, and it is burned so that all the moisture goes out.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	And then extend the ankle bone with nails, and scrape it with a sharp cauterizing knife; and cut off that according to what you can do so that you remove all of it; and keep for the fire which the knife does not touch.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And know that this operation is more safe and further away from the flow of blood, and better than an operation by cutting off.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	But if you have an opposition to blood, then know that you should cure what is opposite for you with this remedy which is said to be used:
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	But if the patient is a little bit sick and does not expect the second operation because of its horrible appearance, then administer perforation according to what I have told you; and when it is confirmed that he has water, through water which we have said of signs, that this hernia is watery.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	And then know that you should put the patient on a high table; then pierce the swelling in the lower part of it with a lead spatula, and place the piercing according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And be the wide opening so that all the water is gone.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	And then place over the area a cloth and leave it there so that the water runs out.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then heal him so that the plague is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	But if the opposite is to the flow of water in that hour, then you pierce it: and if there is no water done but only by the white pannicle on the opening of the plague which causes the flow of water, then know that you put into the plague with a small or an instrument out of which the water comes; or adjust in the place of the plague a little.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And know that the water returns and is gathered after two months or a year; and if it is gathered, then pierce according to that method which I have said, for the disease will last its days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter LXXXIII.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	On Surgery on Cyst Hernias and Their Treatment.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	Know that in the surgery on this hernia is a lost cause to the pernicious conditions; but it is seen that the dismissal of it is safe and is saved by it.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And I have remembered the surgery on those and the spices of the swellings.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	So, say that the swelling arises in the bodies of those whose tendons are connected and it is caused by water for certain causes: or by the flow of water which is gathered in the tendons, or by impact.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And it is the color of the swelling according to the color of the body, and does not change in pain, and the swelling is hard.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And the swelling is very large which is lapified, whose color is dark, and does not feel to it.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And some of them are caused by the tension of the muscles, and by the swelling of those which is already felt the reminder of it, or by the swelling of veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	But water which is caused by the tension of the muscles is recognized by the disappearance of the swelling when you squeeze that with your fingers; and do not know that you touch it.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	But that which is caused by the swelling of veins does not disappear from it for any cause when you squeeze with your fingers.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that on this species be made the section and on the other flesh; and it is because you cut off the tendon behind the knee, and extract all of the ankle bone from its cavity, and untie the ligaments which are hanging from the suspension, and join them together, and cut off those more than you untie.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	So if the ankle bone is already joined with those parts of the flesh which are solid, then know that you extract the ankle bone and cut off that.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is an adhesion within any cause of the ankle bone, or between those which are between the veins, then know that you untie all that adhesion and cut off that with a round incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	But if there is a birthmark in the place of the adhesion which is behind, then know that you cut off all that which belongs to it, and extract the ankle bone as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	So when your operation is completed, then fill the plague with sheep's milk infused with rose water and oil; and then heal that with other cures so that it is healed.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter .lxiv.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	Of the treatment of hernia, which is of vitriolic nature.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	There is an inflammation wrapped in a wrapper resembling a sprig that softens the testicles, and makes difficult exercise and walking on the patient's back.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the treatment of this disease it is by fear of which the following remedy is remembered.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, let them say operation on that second which I have first spoken of.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And I say that you shall make the patient lie on a raised bed; and fasten the suspenders of the testicles to the sartors that are tied to the pole; and let others serve who can reach them by way of extension; and place those who cannot reach by extension under the pole.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And cut with a sharp knife across in two the testicles from side to side, where they are covered by the scrotum.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And cut off entirely all that has been said above in regard to the arteries which are in the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And fasten in those a needle which is twice as thick, and tie the first of the places where the vitriolic occurs, and tie the other opposite to that one.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And cut those in the middle place by a right angle according to the length of the body, and extract what is gathered there of the foul and corrupted humors.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And cure the plague with a remedy for other plagues in which you wish to heal that they may fall the vessels of which you have burned one of the two testicles, for it is not bad for this humor.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	May it happen that all the vessels are destroyed, or that the testicles are cut off by the cutting off of the vessels, so that they are deprived of all nourishment by the incision of the vessels, and that they rot, or that they cease to be nourished by them.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter .lxv.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	Of the treatment of intra-abdominal hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The arrival of this hernia is by incision which passes through the navel extended over the belly from side to side of the navel, so that in case of a break in any of the intestines, it goes into one of them.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture is either of the navel or of an extension thereof, and it occurs for various reasons: either by percussion, or by sounding, or by a cry, or by elevation for some difficult cause, or by resemblance.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	The sign of this is that it occurs gradually over a long period of time, and not suddenly, and is an inflammation within the navel, pressing upon the intestine by its extension, for the navel compresses the intestine.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the sign of it is that it occurs by incision of the navel, for at the beginning a violent pain occurs suddenly; and is an inflammation of various parts near the navel, and the body bends itself forward from side to side of the navel.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And in some cases the cloth is forgotten by the intestine, and this hernia is called intra-abdominal.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And in some cases the intestine swells, and in others a hole is made in it, and here it is retained, and is a great harm to the patient; and sometimes bad and great pain occurs when it is pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the treatment of the causes of this disease by fear, so that one should avoid the injury in that place.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And the way of operating on that is that you command the patient to pull back his intestine to its cavity if it obeys your return, and place it between your hands, and raise the feet of the patient.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And cut the string of the testicles at their base, and cut all that is above it by length; and fasten in two places a needle which you will use to pierce the scrotum according to how large the incision should be made.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if the incision according to the quantity that it is possible for you that it has been forgotten by that one.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And cut off all those parts which are left of the string of the testicles, within which is discovered the navel, a white hard part in each place.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	Then you shall cut off the testicle, which is between the navel, a part that is left of the string of the testicles, and between the navel, and free from the attachment that is in the back of the navel.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And cut the string of the testicles at their ends, and extend the navel in its length on your left side, and raise the testicle at the part of the incision; and command the minister to extend that one on top, and you dissolve the attachment that is behind with a complete solution.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And search among the testicles which are not covered by the hard navel that there is no cause of the buddle being wrapped in it.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	May it happen to you if there is any cause, then put that one in your belly from below.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And you shall take a needle which is twice as thick as the thread, and cut off both ends of it within four threads, and cut them from the middle, so that there are two parts; and bind them together in the shape of a cross; and tie them firmly to the navel on each side with two strings.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And wrap the ends of the threads together with a firm knot, and tie them firmly in such a way that any vessel that does not go through them cannot cause an inflammation here, so that from this place there will be no inflammation.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And pause another string, twice as long as the first thread, and leave it from the navel that is left of the string of the testicles, the same quantity as the length of the thread; and cut all that is above it according to its roundness, and tie it with the navel.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And cut in the place where the string of the testicles is cut by incision, and let it bleed; and if there is any pain or swelling in that place, then do not cut it further.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And give a submerging of lana in oil, and pause in the plague; and give the thread that we have recommended (and sometimes the navel is cauterized, which we said above the incision, because motas occur there) and leave the thread inside it so that it falls.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	May it be delayed if it is wet, then prepare it with oil and pause on top of that one so that it falls according to what we have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And cure the plague with another remedy for other plagues in which you wish to heal that they be healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter .lxi.
De hernia ventosa.	Of the wind hernia.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	There is nothing to be done for this hernia in terms of treatment, because it is not seen to have been caused by anything.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first say that it is done in this way as we have recommended in the hernia which is by virtue of the navel; which is to say, cut off the navel above the incision with ease, and dry up in the middle place where the inflammation occurs with ease, so that the vessels fall.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And cure the plague as we have said within it to be healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter .lxxi.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	Of the distention that occurs in the intestines.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Some veiled women broke out in rashes on their arms, as I said before, and it spread from there.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And do not give them to the genitals; and if you do, it is little; and return in all haste.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	Maybe if the time is prolonged I will have it, it is a deep wound in the hip that should be made into the hip; and this happens to the extension of the hip, and appropriately it softens up the place, it becomes pustular and it spreads out.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the cure for him is as follows, before the story of him.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And some veiled women are cured by felling their legs between your two legs, and appropriately they dry up the place of the rash with a section according to the quantity of three times.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And appropriately he tightens the hip that is lower than the thigh inside so that it is uncovered.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	Then take the rope and place it on the prominent place of the hip, and place it on the navel with a knot.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	Then cut the two prominent places at the end of the rope of the hip, and adjust one to the other with a stitch.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	Then cut off the end of the rope, and do not insert it into the hip at all, nor spread out the belly, nor any other cause as I have told you before in the cure for an intestinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And that cure is appropriate for the blisters, and when you insert the needles, clean those and restore the blister inside so that it is not hardened; because the hip contracts and the prominence of rupture does not become adjusted.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	The cauterization is better in this place, because it is closer to healing.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter 68.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	Of Softening of the Thighs.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	In some men the thighs are softened by water, because the flesh between them is softened, and it is against the rule.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Then it is necessary for the one who is asked in the cure of him that he lie down on his side, and insert all the thigh that is softened over the natural thigh; and appropriately he adjusts two lips to the stitch.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you want, cut off the superfluity of the softened thigh at three or four places with a firm stitch.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	Then cut between the stitches, and appropriately he cures all other blisters inside so that they are healed and the needles fall out.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter 69.
De castracio.	Of Castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	You should know that castration in our law is prohibited, except for a reason that I remember it in this book; and it is not necessary to remember it unless by two ways, of which one is so that he is in the science of the doctor when he is questioned about that, which knows the cure for him on whom it happens; and the other way is that we need to castrate other animals for our benefit with those, as in the case of rams, ewes, pigs, and similar creatures.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And therefore I say that castration is performed in two ways: either by cutting off from the front, or by cutting open to the side with a section.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	And in that which is done by cutting off from the front, the way of the operation is that we make the beast swim tail-first so that its genitals are softened and become limp and hang down.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	Then take those with your hand inside so that they are relaxed and do not appear by touch.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	And in castration by cutting open and sectioning it is done, that you have the beast, and press the thigh of his testicles with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	Then take the suspenders, and place them on each side with a section so that two sides process.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And appropriately you insert those before each excoriation.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not leave on any of the hip any cause, but rather the subtle hip that is over the veins.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	This way of castration is better, because it cuts off from the front, so that no cause remains in the testicles for the beast to desire to copulate.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	Then he cures the blister before it is healed.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter 70.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	Of the Cure for Hermaphroditism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphroditism in men is due to two ways: the first is because it appears that the space in the thigh is between two testicles, as a woman's figure is formed because of a cunt; and the second way is that it appears that there are testicles in front of the belly, as a woman's breasts.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	Some of those men have urine running from their thigh, which is between the testicles.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	In women there is one species: and it is that the cunt of the woman over the penis is like two testicles in man a little bit small to the separation from the forepine, as the cunt of man and two testicles.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	The cure is of three species: of the two men and of one species of women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And it is because you cut those muscles that are adjusted inside so that the smell of that one is gone, and appropriately he cures those with the cure for other blisters.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	In the second species of men from which you get urine that is in the thigh, it is not a cure or an operation.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 81.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	Of Piercing and of Flesh that Is Prominent by Causes of Women.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	A strong piercing is adjusted because of natural causes before it is stretched and it is made to fall back with the rule; and some veiled women are enlarged in some women so much that they are spread out by doing what men do, and they come within the reach of intercourse.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Then take the superfluity of piercing with your hand or with an iron and place it on.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not end in incision, more in the hair on the head, so that it does not cause a flow of blood.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	Then he cures that one with the cure for blisters inside so that it is healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	And hidden meat is meat that is in the belly of a mother, and it fills that one, and it is strong so that it is separated by doing what we do with piercing, and appropriately we insert those when we pierce, and cure that one before it is healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter 72.
De curacio de alratica.	Of the Cure for Herpes.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Herpes is that the cunt of the woman is not pierced, or is a small hole.
E es o natural o accidental.	And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental is because of bad weather that has preceded, and that one is made by unadjusted meat or a hip that is subtle or tight.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	And it is made by the hair on the mother's head, or her arms, or the lower part of her belly, or the upper part of her belly, and it is prohibited to cut and to engage in sex and to have children, and it is strong that it is prohibited to menstruate.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	The knowledge of that one is made by looking at the moon, if the obstruction appears, probably; but if it does not appear, then you seek it out with the fingers or with the rope.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	And if obstruction is by a hip that is subtle, and it is closer to the two lips, then you cut and break that one.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And it is because you pause on the two lips with your fingers, and appropriately you put the rope between the two sides.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the woman be on her back, her legs extended, and so extend the two lips with force before that small piece is broken and the oppression is opened.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	Then take wool and pour oil on it and place it on the spot, and make a cut into it so that the spot does not close.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	But if the piece is thick and fat, then cover that which you cut with a sponge of lime or with a leaf of mint.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	But if the oppression is caused by flesh, then suspend that with oil, and cut it.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And if the medicines which cause a cessation of flowing blood from wounds, are not effective, then add to them a little lead and copper, and adjust it with white wine.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	Then administer a wide lead catheter so that the pain does not close up badly.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And hold it in place for several days and administer liquid lead.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	Then he is cured with the other cure of consolidation, so that he may be healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And sometimes in the mother’s pregnancy of other animals, then cut according to this way.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	But if it is for a toothache in the wisdom teeth which are not made in any way contrary to putting something in a certain way.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter LXXIII.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	Of the Cure of Hemorrhoids and of Thigh and of Red Swelling that Occurs in the Vagina of Women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids such as those of small veins that occur within those orifices from which blood constantly flows; and when they are old hemorrhoids, then they are painful.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And I have said in the division the spices of those and their signs, and direct them as follows those which I receive cure and those which I do not receive cure.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Then say that hemorrhoids and thigh when in the mother’s womb do not appear on the feel, then in those is not made cure by putting anything.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	But those which are in the orifice of the mother over whose feel appears to be cured.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	Then cover the woman with a cold cloth and extend those with forceps or a sharp razor, and cut them with the razor.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	Then sprinkle on those of the dust from one of the powders that you cut into a wound, thus with mint and similar to those.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	Then weigh the feet for an hour, then place them in boiling water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the flow of blood persists, then boil them in a decoction of sumac and pepper grains and of herbs.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	Then take wheat flour and make a paste with honey and vinegar, and put it on the feet with water.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the blood is dried up, then boil it; and if not, then join them with two glasses, and make incisions in the breasts.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then take wool and immerse them in juice of coriander or of arnica or of grape must, and put it on the area; then heal the area within that it is healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	But those whom you cut with force, then pour on oil which appears from that second that I said in thigh joining.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And heal that within that it is healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter LXXIV.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	Of the Perforation of Nerve in the Mother.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Small veins sometimes occur in the mother, thus with toothache and pain, swelling, and itching, and blisters, and ulcers, and fever, and thigh, and other small veins.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have said these diseases and the spices of those and their signs, and the cures of them in the division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	Then say in this treatise of the perforation cure which you make in the mother when it is of the perforations that you cut, and if you wish to know how the operation of them is made by putting anything.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Then consider if the pain of the toothache in its beginning is acute with percussion and swelling and fever, and sometimes that it becomes hard, and if you cut into that with a perforation, then heal that with water which helps within that the severity of those changes stops.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	Then when you cut the woman on a table which has two tables; and place her on her back with her legs extended, and pause her hands below her belly, and open her legs from her thighs, and pour water there convenient.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	Then the woman follows her to the right side and administer the instrument with which you cut the orifice of the mother, the shape of which will come in those cases that you will make it appropriate.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And when you wish to administer this instrument that you put it on the right side of the mother’s womb, and with that instrument it enters into the mother’s womb, and all bad things are removed from her womb.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	But if the instrument is greater than the mother’s womb, then when you pause powder on the texture of the mother’s womb in order that the entry of any instrument into the mother’s womb be prohibited.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	Then when you pause the liquid which flows in the instrument on the right side and that the minister holds the instrument and mixes the liquid within that it is suitable for cutting the orifice of the mother.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	Then when you feel the excitement, and it is touched with your hand, then cut those off with a pointed cautery.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	Then when the pain is relieved, then cover that with a cotton wool dip in olive rosin or olive green in which there is no stringency; and place the cloth on the section of the mother’s womb.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	Then cover the mother with a clean white wool cloth dipped in water which is clear and free of wrinkles.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then he is cured after two days by putting on oil which appears within that it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	Then sometimes the mother is washed and the pain is relieved by a solution of sugar and honey, and dip it in water in which razids of lavender or of herb are long, then return to the oil.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	But if the pain is inside the mother’s womb, then when you are prohibited from curing it by putting anything in, then heal that with water which I have said in the division.
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter LXXV.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	Of Teaching the Midwives in What Manner the Blemishes on the Body are Healed when they feel according to this figure that is not natural.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	The necessary cause is that the midwife recognizes in the beginning of the natural conception by signs of her, and it is that when you see the woman express herself to the left side and desire to smell the air, and above it is extended per se by water which is over it, and she hastens to express the child, then know that this part is the second figure of nature, and the expression of him on her head, and the second one hanging or suspended from the navel.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Then when you see those signs, then the mother’s belly is moved by that the expression of the child is slightly above that when it is over her head, then draw it to her left side, and she is born from those superfluities with good birth.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu .i., o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	But that which is the other of this part is not natural and unworthy, for when the child is expressed over its feet and his back is expressed before his head and his feet, and the mother’s hand on her side, or on her neck, then know that it is a female. If his head and hand are not placed in the right position, or if his belly is turned towards him, then he will fall forward on his chest and cannot move his arms, like the figures of a wheel.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	A necessary cause is that the midwife be skilled and subtle in all matters, and that she guard against error and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And you shall show all the figures of those, and what use there is in them so that it may be understood by him who looks at it, and that he may stand on it.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When he is placed on his head by natural inclination, and he is violent with the woman, and it is a difficult birth, and sometimes the virtue of him has already failed her, then let the woman lie down, or have someone help her, and pour boiling water on her skin with fennel seeds and oil.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	Then the midwife shall put her between the two spinners and a cloth, or cut off that part of her with a sharp knife while it is wet with moisture.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press the woman's belly in so that the baby comes out.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	If it does not come out, then cover her with a blanket of wool and a covering of fennel seeds mixed with wool.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	Then order him, while she is covered and pressed, to sneeze, and for an hour keep his mouth and nose closed, because the child will soon come out.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if both of them sneeze at the beginning, then cover her with ease, little by little.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	If you do not obey the instrument, then place the woman on a mat and lift her feet up, and then hit the mat against the ground; and let the woman be held so that she does not fall because of the blow.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the third does not come out whole and the child is torn from within, then cut it off and pull it out with an iron string, for it will soon come out whole.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	Of the fetus on its feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the fetus is on its feet, then push it down on them, and little by little make it stand up, and little by little hold it up, and little by little bring it to life.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	But when it is inside the woman's legs, then order him to sneeze with a covering, because if God wills it, he will come out whole.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it is not whole when you place him in the water that we have spoken of, then return it little by little until it reaches the second natural figure, for he will soon come out whole if God wills it.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is forbidden to place him in all the water that we have spoken of, then take musk of alma and dissolved gum, and beat them well in a mortar, and pour it on the woman's navel, the lower part of her belly.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	Then place that knife in boiling water, so that it can cut the umbilical cord.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when the parts of him are no longer moving, then give him sub-fume of mint and sub-pause to him.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when the sub-fume has lasted an hour, then place him on a mat, and then make him sneeze and open his mouth, and take out the cord from within, and press the lower part of his belly lightly with compression, because the child will soon come out whole.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Of the fetus on its feet and its legs.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the child is in this form, then place its legs little by little; and let the woman sit down on her chest, and place her feet down, and join her hands together.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	Then press on his belly little by little, and then take him out from under his feet, from his ears, so that he is prepared for the birth of the second part.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the child is not coming out, then take his feet and move them violently, and then press on him who is above little by little until the child can come out from between him.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	Then place its hands and hold the child little by little, and order the woman to squeeze little by little until the child comes out whole.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Of the fetus hanging upside down from one of its feet.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	He should be lowered into the womb, but if you cannot do that, then lift her up and let her go.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if she cannot go, then place her on the ground, and hit her with a violent blow, and administer to her the medicines that we have spoken of.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if the child has come out, then place the woman on a mat, and study how to lower her body, and hold the second child in your hands little by little, and make her sneeze, and order her to squeeze herself little by little until she comes out whole.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Of the child on its back with its legs and feet spread apart, and its head between its mother's legs.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	Then let the midwife hold the child's head, and then turn it little by little with ease.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when it is swallowed and when it is ready to come out, then place it in the water that we have spoken of with oil and mucus.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	Then order him to move his mouth little by little, and when it is ready to come out, then place the mat on your left side, and press her belly with ease; and make her sneeze with a covering.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	The exit of the fetus is prepared on its left side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When the mother's second child appears in this way, consider it, and then you shall place her hand on your leg within so that it is free of moisture.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the fetus hangs over its mother' head and foot, then you shall cut it off, so that it is not kept or delayed.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	Then place the fetus on the inside parts within so that it is prepared for the birth of the second child, and order the woman to squeeze herself a few times, and let him come out whole if God wills it.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	The exit of twins or many children.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Know that twins come out separated from each other, and sometimes three or four come out at the same time, but only one child is born alive; and it is an extraordinary event caused by nature, not something that can be controlled.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	Count them, for they are multiplied, one after the other, and are separated by a cord from each other; and those that remain outside the womb are not alive, but are dead. And sometimes there is one child in the womb for one mother, and some children are cut off with an knife at the navel of another woman; and sometimes some children come out whole through a birthmark on someone else's navel, because it is not possible to control what happens in nature.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	If the child is difficult to bring out and it has come into a strange shape that cannot be controlled by nature, then you shall take care of them as we have spoken of.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the midwife is skilled and wise, and works with ease and subtlety, and does not delay it, and creates an image of something that is useful for her salvation.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Remember that it is formed in the womb from embryos and that some are aborted.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Some are made in the mother's womb one, two, three, four, and five, and six, seven, eight, ten, and already it has been verified that a woman gets pregnant with six, and another with ten altogether, which causes great marvel to the glorious wise ones.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And in all this it is clear that if one were to inquire into the science of midwifery, how much greater will be his suffering because of the little knowledge he has about it, and therefore pause until he knows about it.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter .LXVII
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	On the Extraction of the Foetus When It is Dead.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you are dealing with a dead fetus, as we have said in the division of medical treatment, and it does not come out on its own, then you must certainly use surgery to get it out, provided that you consider whether the female is of good health and not subject to any accidents for which it would be a waste of life.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Then, when the female is lying down on her back, and her head is inclined downward, and her thighs are raised,
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	the minister should hold it with two hands or tie it in the lying down position, so that the body does not extend itself during the extraction of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	Then you should moisten the mouth of the mother with oil, and with a warm mixture of alfalfa and fenugreek, and with a taste of licorice.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	Then you should put these oils and mixtures on the mother's hands, and with ease make her lie down in a comfortable position, and around her navel, so that the nails of the fetus are caught around it.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	An appropriate place: then you should consider whether the fetus is prepared for delivery, and if so, place it on its head, and fasten its nails into the hair of its head, or into its neck, or into its mouth, or onto its palate, or leave it with its beard, or onto its collarbone, or onto its ribs, or near its shoulders, or its hips.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	Otherwise, if the delivery is to be made on the feet of the child, then in the fifth rib, or in the middle of the ribs.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	Then he should hold the nail with his right hand, and place the child's head in that position where it is between the shoulders of the mother, and make an incision there, unless it comes out on its own, until it reaches the cause from which it has come, without difficulty.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	Then you should place another nail in its position, or the third, if necessary, so that it is attracted and not extended, according to its nature only.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	Thus it will be more pleasant from the very beginning, that the delivery of the child is eased in this way, and not extended in any way, as it should be. And when the child has come out entirely, then you may cut off its umbilical cord.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	Then in the water between them where the extension is softened; and if any part of it is retained, then consider that the mother should rub some oil there, and put it in a particular way, and turn it over with her hands, so that the water that has been retained comes out.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Then if the child's part has been taken out, consider that the nails are swapped around to this position where it is put first; and do so before all the child has come out.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	Otherwise, if the mother's back is exposed before the other one, and it is not possible to reduce that part by the skin's tension, then consider that it should be wrapped up in this way; and extract that part before all of it has come out, and mark that or the joint of the hand.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And so you should make an incision on the other side, and on both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Otherwise, if the child' head is large, or its skin is torn during delivery, or it is caught in the water pipe, then consider that you should put it between the two spine bones and cut off the head, and extract the water by this means, or use an instrument called "round" whose form will be like the forms of the other instruments in the chapter where this is appropriate.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	Then it should be made if the child's head is large by nature: and consider that you should mark it with a pencil, or cut it off with a sharp instrument as we have said; and then extract the bones with pliers.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head is delivered and caught by the collarbone, then it should be cut there before extracting the moisture that has been poured into the foot.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	Otherwise, if it is not complicated, and is not delivered during sleep, then consider that you should mark it soon as possible after delivery.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the child is in the mother's womb, or is in her bladder, then you should pierce it there to extract the moisture that is in it.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	Otherwise, if the child is on its mother' legs, then its attraction will be light and its direction to her mouth will also be light.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	Otherwise, if the child is caught by nature before it comes out of the mother' belly, then consider that you should wrap it in cloth over your mother' back, and cut open her belly and extract the child therefrom, unless there is moisture coming out from it.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	Otherwise, if the other members are still alive and the head is turned around, then consider that the mother puts her left hand; if her mouth is open, then consider that she puts her right hand there, and marks where the child should come out, and throws it into her mouth, and places a nail in its position, or two nails, and inserts it.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mother's mouth is closed by a swelling due to sickness, then consider that it should not be cut there, but rather pour in a stream of warm water.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And administer plasters; and follow the patient with water that softens and moistens him.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the child is on its mother' side, then consider that it should be cut, if possible; and give it water as we have said in the previous paragraph.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if water is not possible, then the child should be extracted through the legs, and mark where it comes out.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	Then consider that there are no causes within the second one.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	Then, when you have finished your work, administer water as we have said in the previous paragraph, for the mother's good health.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if blood comes out during pregnancy, then consider that you should take a bath in warm water and administer the other treatment.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	You have already seen a female in whose womb there was a dead fetus, and another pregnant woman nearby; and the second one gave birth to a live child, while the first one had a dead fetus.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	Then it happened that a long time ago there was an apoplexy in the womb; and it swelled up until it broke open, and then blood came out.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And you were called to treat him, and you treated him for a long time, but the plague was not consolidated.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then you continued to treat him with some plasters to relieve his strong attraction, and extracted a bone from him, and passed a few days later, and another bone came out; and you were amazed, for there was not a bone in his womb.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	Then you began to think that they belonged to the dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Then you cured the plague in him, and extracted some bones from him; the existing female was in her usual dispositions, and I saw her for a long time, and corrected her, giving her a little bit of blood.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	Then you did not consider it strange, but rather that there is science and help for those who do not want to listen; the doctor should also be able to help them with a treatment given by
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	From the shapes of the instruments that are necessary to extract the fet.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Form of vertical, at which the mother is opened:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of sternum in which the free are pegged, at which pegging there are two vertiges on the two extremes of two fists.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	However this vertice is covered that it is put subtler of sternum, and is made or of ebony or of oak wood.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And it is the length of each fist that there are two dices and margin of both sides that a dice, and the length of each is a palm and half; and in its place of two fists so are two adjustments of this same fists which already they are closed up, of whose the length is the majority of a palm and a little bit less, and the width of each is a die or a little less.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two additions are entomes in the mouth of the mother so that it is opened to them when you rotate the two prescribed vertiges.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Other form similar to that more subtle and more light:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	Be made of ebony or oak wood according to the appearance of pliers.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	However in the end of you so two additions also sometimes, and the length of these additions is that a palm, and the width of each one is a die.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open the mother, then do so that she is placed on her back with the legs hanging down, making a hole between them.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	And bring your hand close to the instruments also as you do with pliers according to the quantity that you want of the impression of the mouth of the mother within which the ruler makes so that it is made according to what you want.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of vertice that they say the ancients:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	Form of impulse at which it is urged the fet:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	Form of admiration to which is crushed the head big:
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is assembled to pliers at which there are teeth in the end, sometimes, and some veiled it is made long also with pliers according to this form, sometimes, at which there are teeth of return on the side that they are incised and crushed.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Form of little admiration:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Form of a point with one spine:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Form of a point with two spines:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Form of pliers at which there are teeth of close according to which the head of the fet is crushed:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	Form of a staff with two extremes at which the head is cut off:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Form of two staffs long:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All these instruments are made to work, and when many kinds of food they are prepared the artisan, how easy it is for his operation and how more it is useful for men because of its quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And do not open these instruments if they are unnecessary because the necessity of these is not excusable.
De extraccio de la segondina.	Of extraction of the second.
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second is held, you command to the malady that it holds its ale, and bring your hand close to the mouth of him and his nostrils, and if by this way he sneezes, it is good.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	But if not, you take a wave and pierce in the lid a twig and stop it on that herb burn the mouth of the mother, sometimes with pressure and roughness and add chamomile and sage and cassia and thyme.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them are submerged in water in the wave, and place it on fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And bring a tube of cannabise into the mouth of the mother, and place it in that place where the vapor comes out to the cavity of the mother.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And bring that sneezing sometimes with a whistle, and the second is gone quickly forgotten.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	But if she still remains, you command to the mother that it submerge her left hand in olive oil or in mixture of mint of marjoram, and bring that into the cup and wants for the second, and with this way found, then take it and extract it little by little according to the method that we have described so that the mother does not hurt herself because of the attraction.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	And before you go change clothes left-right easily.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And then be adjusted according to the quantity of attraction, because it will obey and avoid attachment.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mouth of the mother is closed, then we have described the cure with sneezing and with medication of the wave with herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	But if not forgotten by all the causes that we have described, then you do not extract it more times according to this method, but bring what is extracted from him with oil and add a little salt, and keep that for some days and dissolve and forget it.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	But if it is dried up, it has a bad smell to the head and the stomach, and the mother drinks it; and then bring that is administered by smoking and convenient ways at water.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	And some of the Ancients have already been used smoking with nose-cleaner and with dried figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	Form of an instrument to which the woman is smoked according to the holding of menstrual blood and the second:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	Be made of amber or of brass.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And it is stopped the end of a needle and the other end that is wide on the fire, and smoking be stopped over the embers of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And place that in which it is consumed that smoking and repeat: another.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	Of the cure of the bottom of the unpierced child.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	Mothern nature, but if it is not pierced, then bring that with water and pierce them subtly and refine them.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then bring to the mother that it pierce her own food, and if not, then pierce that with a staff close to the mouth, and keep that it does not touch the lacert.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	And bring that into the cloud of smoke in view and oil; and bring that with vinegar according to which it is cured, and keep that away from the sun.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	But if you fear that it will be burned, then bring a tube of cannabise for three days, and stop it when the child wants to pee.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And this has already happened with the burning of the bottom by the consolidation of plague or of an apostema; and then bring that consolidation is cut off, and bring that is cured with water that we have said of the cure and of ash.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	Of the cure of the fistulas that we leave behind.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistulas that we leave behind in the seat of a child are put less on a knot and grossness that they leave behind near the bottom or in the space of one seat.
E es una fistula o motas.	It is a fistula or a mole.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And with that knot, it is old and it flows of the moist white or peyerous substance gradually, and some of these fistulas are piercing.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And these that pierce are known for water that is extracted from them because of the exit and the windness; and some times use the marjoram for exit, and strong is extracted from them from vermouth.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And some of these fistulas sometimes enter the space through a piercing into the bladder, and into the meat of the pelvis; and those that pierce enter the junction of the crotch, and enter into the navel of the loin.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And in that which is known as a fistula penetrating into the buttocks and not penetrating, then you put in the little finger called "endicus" in the buttocks, and you insert a small probe of iron into the fistula when it is not blocked.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	But if there is a block in that, then you insert a small piece of iron or goat's hair into the opening until you feel the block or hair on your little finger.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel that at all or do not find any cause of discharge nor worms nor vomiting, as I have said, then know that it is non-penetrating, and then wrap it up for treatment.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula enters into the bladder or into the flesh of the penis, then the meaning of it is nothing but urine from that and prohibition for it to go to that place which I will treat so that the place be healed.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	But if it enters into the junction of the thighs or into the bone and causes pain in the route of the passage, then the sign of it is that the probe has entered here if it is not blocked within the bone, and causes pain in the route of the passage; and that it often comes out; and that it does not benefit from that medicine, nor is healed by it with a poultice.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those fistulas that penetrate there is no cure at all, and the cure of those is work and futility of medical herbs above which are fermats.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	But in that which is not penetrating and old, recovery by iron is hoped for according to what you have advised me, and that which I have already heard and tried.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And it is that the patient lies between your two legs and raises their legs within them, the thighs are inclined towards his belly, and you insert a probe of iron or a point of steel into the fistula if it is blocked, so that you know the place where the block is.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if that makes the patient turn their back, then cover them so that you do not insert your little finger into his anus.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel the little finger's pain when it is inserted into the anus, or you feel something between the little finger and that hole or flesh, then you certainly know that it is penetrating; and then do not work on that, for there is no cure in it, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	But some say that it cures some men quickly.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And of the medicine by which he is expected to recover quickly is that you ignite a subtle cauterization according to the width of the fistula, as it is preceded, and insert that ignited thing into the fistula until it enters through his anus; and then repeat that two or three times within that you know that all those injured and inflamed tissues are tightly closed.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And then that one is cured with calipers wrapped in bandages within that all those tissues which are closed and tightened are healed, and then that one is cured with the medicines that engender and consolidate flesh, and if it is healed, it is good; and if not, then it is not healed by any other cure.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if the pain enters and does not penetrate into the little finger in the buttocks, and between that and the pain which is slightly flesh or something like a knot, and sometimes the fistula splits until it reaches the skin, then dry the skin from the beginning of the split, and you shall see if the skin dries up with the split, and through the split, the pain is freed and goes out; and through that pain, he is cured and relieved.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And then make those injured tissues look like a pipe made of the hair of an aurochs, and not that they are split because of some cause.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	But if the flow of blood comes between you and your operation when you are wrapping those tissues, then the milk that is made and the less toxic instrument is to cauterize with fire or with acute medicine, for cauterization with fire keeps two clean: it is tightly closed with those tissues; and it removes the dry pain of the skin.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And then that one is cured with calipers wrapped in a bandage or a torn tissue within that place which becomes soft, and then immediately that one is cured from the plague with hard flesh that engenders and consolidates.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And thus medicines are used in which there is strictness and slicing; when it is restored, then it is healed and you do not fear recurrence.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	But if the fistula has already penetrated into the muscle of the buttocks and is elongated from its surface, then insert your little finger into the buttocks and feel it out.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And if you feel the pain one hundred times and between you and it is slightly flesh or something like a knot, and it is on the verge of penetration, then do not operate on him in this way but according to a trusted and hopeful path.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	That cause is administered in it one of three ways: either that it cauterizes that already mentioned; or that you dry that within which you can reach the cavity so that you can insert your fingers and the cure is possible; and do not cut through it at all so that you do not injure the skin containing the buttocks, and that you come to pass into the patient's own will; and then heal that with water that has healed; or that you lengthen that slightly and make that pus that you dry within; either that you insert a probe of steel into that within which you can reach the cavity so that you can cut through it, and then make an effort to restore all the plague with a section; and if the hole pus does not consolidate, and the fistula opens at the opening of the buttocks, and then let the patient pass water.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And some times the fistula is finished according to this way: you insert the probe into the fistula, and it is at the edge of the buttocks' surface with the thread and on the side of the buttocks, then take an attempt to pierce with the sharp end, which is done thus to prepare the wounds according to this form:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	and wrap it in five fields or insert it into those; and then insert the probe into the fistula within which you can reach the cavity.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	But if it penetrates into the side of the buttocks at its end, then you take out the thread from that already mentioned; and when you have wrapped it in five fields or inserted it into those, then insert the probe into the fistula within which you can reach the cavity.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And then that one is cured and relieved within that it is healed and restored.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	But if the hole of the fistula is not penetrating, then make that one penetrate, in any way you prepare it, but do not cut into him so that you do not injure the skin; and then make that one heal within that it be healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The shape of the sharp thing used in cutting that is split in two parts: the curved part is a sharp end and the other side is not, so that you do not injure that which is not needed, as it happens sometimes.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	Of surgery for hemorrhoids in which there runs blood during the incision of those.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Emorrhoids are of two kinds, either they lie between the buttocks resembling grass or those are full of grease.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And they are small or large, and that the blood runs from them at all times and is one, and they are close together, and not outside the buttocks, but in its extremities.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	Then those who are in the back of the body and the legs are the first ones to feel the cold: when there is little moisture in them, citric water or a small amount of blood comes out continuously, and depending on the color of the body.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the treatment for those who are inside the body and the legs is that you order the patient to lie down and press him so that the legs don't burn, and the blood appears.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you sit down and hang yourself or whatever you have with your nail, and approach those lines on their joints.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	But if the nails are not wet with their moisture and softness, then take them with a sharp tool or a bone or a piece of wool, and cut those joints at the roots, and apply some dry ashes on them near the wound, so that they will be at those places instead of cauterizing; or cauterize them as it is described in the chapter about cauterization.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And then treat those with the other treatment until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the buttocks don't respond to the treatment of leaving them alone, then use a little hook to lift up the patient's buttocks, and wash with that water that is in the buttocks and which responds to leaving them alone slightly.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	But if the hemorrhoids are outside the buttocks, then the cause of them is that you take those with your nail, or with a small hook, cut them, and then treat those with water that we have described until they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And if you have to cut a wound, follow this method: take a piece of thread and wind it around the end of a needle, then push that end into the wound, and pull out the other end of the thread onto the surface above, and then insert the needle again into the end of the wound, and wrap the two ends of the thread onto the surface below the needle; and tighten the knot strongly, and then cut off the thread.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And pour that water completely on them, and leave one of them ungermed so that the excess blood runs out from it.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	Then place over the buttocks a cloth soaked in rose oil or wax, and place that cloth on the patient' body and order the patient to lie down.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then leave it until it is cured; and when it falls, treat those with oil or with any other treatment until they are healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	Of the treatment of fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Mottled spots appear because of dry skin or a natural constriction.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	But these old methods don' t work in this medicine, then you cut those with the tip of a спатум or your fingernail until they are moist and wet, and hold them from drying out by applying something on them that prevents them from drying; and then treat those after they are consolidated.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Then you burn those with a sharp ray of light or a strong wind, so that they become blisters, and then treat those until they are healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	Of the treatment of eye damage, and this is all.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	Know that it is useless to treat damage to the eyes, and it is only good for warning you of approaching danger, and it affects the whole body, but mainly the feet and hands, and through them you can feel pain in other parts of the body.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And then you cut off with scissors or a small hook the part that is affected by this pain, and then treat that spot.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	If you want to, cauterize the second one as described in the previous chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	But a mole is a small, sharp, round, dry swelling on the surface of the body, and mottled spots appear in children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	The treatment for this is to stretch and cut it, or to treat it with a thread wrapped around it that is tightened.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	If you want to, cauterize the water as we have described, either by fire or by acute medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And then cut them from side to side with a sharp instrument.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	But a fever is a small swollen area on the skin that looks like a burn or a rash, and when it touches it feels like a tiny frostbite, and it hurts all over the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	The treatment for this is to take a pen of feather or a needle, and make it strong, and place that over the swelling so that it contains the circle of the pen around it; and then turn your hand with the pen until you cut through the skin, and place your hand on the back of the neck where the pain is; and then pour out water that has been treated as described above onto the area, and treat it.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	If you want to, use water from an iron or an iron rod according to this method:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	Let the end of the pen be slightly thinner and less sharp (if it doesn't perforate), wrapped with a thread that keeps it from moving; and when you put it on, make it spin over the skin.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	If you want to, cauterize the swelling according to what we have described above in the chapter about cauterization.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	Of the shape of the instruments that are used to give a little hook.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Some spots are treated with silver or molten lead or a little iron, and some spots are treated with small instruments, because the ones used for treating small children should be small; and those used for treating older people should be larger, because the tools used for treating adults are usually larger.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The shape of a large hook:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The end of the pen above, in which the thread is tied: and the distance between that end and where the thread is tied is large according to this method; and the distance between the pen and where it is tied is small.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the tip of the pen below, which is inserted into the buttocks, should be slightly sharp  (if it doesn' t pierce), and turning on a small hook, back and forth, and in one side of the hook there are two turns, and on the other side only one turn, and the thickness of the hook according to the thickness of the lines.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And the bag in which the medicines for the blister are kept should be made of animal or sheep's skin, and the end of the pen should be a palm.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And it should be pierced by two sharp ends, as it is turned over; and if the distance between those ends is large, then the thickness of the pen.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And then insert that pen into the holes with a strong thread that has been strained between two sharp ends, and adjust the bag; and when it is placed on him, make it tight at both ends of the pen: May the quality of cutting those spots be that you fill the bag with medicine, and boil it according to the tolerance level of the patient; and beware of making it too small or too large.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	And then place the patient on their back, raise their legs onto a bed or a mattress, and place them at a comfortable distance from the wall; and order the minister to pour out the medicine in a stream over the body while it is being turned over, and then take away the medicine and place the bag of medicine next to him, and press those spots with two fingers firmly, and then cut those spots with scissors: Then remove the cuts and return them to their places.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	If the medicine makes him sneeze, let him have as much as he wants; and if it makes him sleep for a long time, it is a sign of death.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	May you cure those in the throes of stomach pain and feverish heat with the poultice, then repeat the cauterization until they are healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if there are painful hemorrhoids or blisters in the groin, then use a very fine and sharp cauterizing tool, such as those used to treat children's warts.
De curacio de las plaguas.	For treating wounds.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	You have already said and I repeat that for treating wounds, it is necessary to use a sharp tool, and I say again that for treating these with medicines according to the disease.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore, I say that wounds are diverse according to where they are made and according to the place where they occur.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes of the wounds are either due to a fall from a height, or to a cut with a knife, or to a lance, or to a spear, or to an arrow, or similar to those caused by weapons.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	And the wounds that occur in the body's parts are either on the head, or on the neck, or on the foot, or on the belly, or on the back, similar to those that affect the members.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And I recommend treating some wounds with a certain method and reasoning, and applying that same approach to other wounds.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And I will begin with the wounds on the head, since the reminder of the formulae will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Therefore, I say that when a simple wound occurs on the head and is not a fracture, consider: if it is due to a fall or a similar cause, and it has already bled profusely, then immediately apply a cold poultice and a head bath, and do not delay in doing so; and extract the thorns from the wound according to the amount of the medicine's virtue if there is no other reason to prohibit the application of a head bath, more so if the wound is due to a small amount.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And be careful with the application of a head bath in opposite cases to the infected wound; and protect the patient from cold, rough clothes, and heavy foods.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	And if there is no reason to prohibit anything, then reduce the food and do not bring it close to meat or wine.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And apply a compress of rosewater alone or in wine which is slightly stinging.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	And if you are certain that it is a case of acute apotheosis, then apply to the wound, if it is new, the powder which I recommended to use slightly.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed, then apply a compress of salt water within until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	And if the wound is large or due to an incision with a knife or similar, and the lips of the patient are not closed by the teeth, then adjust them with the sutures as I recommend for sewing their mouths shut.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	And if the wound has already broken through the bone and there is only a small protrusion, then cut it and apply medicines to heal the wound; restore the flesh to its place instead of a cordon, and order the patient to eat only soft foods: cheese and bread, cooked and pureed, until it heals.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you suspect that the cordon is腐烂并着肉，不要将其切除，而是用药水浸泡并切开；然后处理好。
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	And if these wounds are on arteries or veins from which blood may flow, and they cannot be stopped by medicines alone, then inquire about the artery, and if you suspect that it is not severed, then cut it with a blade, or ligature; and if necessity compels you to do something that we have not mentioned, then cauterize until the blood stops.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these wounds are simple and small, then the cause of them is light; therefore, you will apply powder to them because once they have hardened, the air changes their state before applying it.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	And the method of making the powder is this: take rosewater in three parts, dragon' water in two parts, and for non-extinct causes in one part; all mixed together and well shaken, and if there is a wound filled with pus, bind it tightly until it heals, and let it coagulate with the dragon' water.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And apply the powder to it with a blade and let it rest, and do not remove it until it has healed; because if there is pus, then applying the medicine to it will not help unless it has hardened.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And never use only one kind of medicine when treating with rosewater and dragon' water.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And perform this operation on large wounds when it is necessary to pause them and let them rest; and only on wounds that are new and have just formed, the air has not changed their state yet.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has altered them, and especially during summer, do not be concerned about the position of this powder; rather, apply water to them as I mentioned before, and if it is difficult to bind them, then apply a compress of flour and water, well mixed, until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	And if you have a fracture wound in the bone, which is small, then extract it with your hands.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	I will direct the treatment for fractures of the head in what is poisonous.
De las plaguas del col.	For treating groin wounds.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	And if the wound occurs in the groin, it is not different from head wounds in terms of treatment; and between the wounds of the head when they are simple.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	And if the nerves of the groin are incised or arteriovascular, then they should be treated with water which causes mild stinging, like vinegar applied to them; and if there is a node in the nerve, it should be cut so that blood does not flow into it.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not pause over the wound for any reason that causes pain, because the substance of nerves is painful and the continuation of it is into the brain, which is pus from all the members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if it is cured by using light medicines, such as rinsing with lukewarm water, and a small amount of rosewater or no-rosewater, then wash thoroughly with lukewarm water and let it dry naturally; and if there is a painful swelling, then apply minstrelsy to it, that is, rosewater or non-rosewater, and wash with lukewarm water when the swelling becomes soft.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	And if the wound is large, then apply sutures, or bind the lips tightly, and treat it with powder until it heals.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	And if the wound is deep or occurs in a low place with pus, then pierce it at its most depressed point.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	And if the wound has already broken through an artery and there is a continuous flow of blood, then separate it or stop the blood flow with a ligature; or cauterize it if necessity compels you to do so with water.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	And if the cordons have already been cut and all the veins of the neck are tied up, then adjust the lips of the patient to their place over the throat and tighten them gently; then let it rest for a while, and then treat it with water which causes mild stinging and excitement until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	And if the wound has already been broken in the bone and is healing on its own, then extract all the pieces you can; and if it is not covered with a cloth, let it rest until it is healed, and separate it from anything that might harm it; and if necessary, clean it.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the plague is recent, then powder on that powder which I have told you about.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	Or if in the plague a fistula is made, then cure that wound from which the memory will come back to the site in its own time.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Of the plagues of the neck or similar when they come between the shoulders and are made by a knife, lance, or spear.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a stab from a knife or lance and the depth is known, then consider whether there is windiness in the patient's illness; then know that the plague is deadly.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if there is no depth and the plague is recent, then you should pause in it from the first hour with powder, and do not tighten that which keeps the patient's legs open, so that the plague does not come back to the site and stay within the body; but pause in it with a wet poultice, and take care that two watch over him for the day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the poultice is not with you, then you should pause in the opening of the plague with a wet cloth so that it sucks up what there is of moisture; and have the patient sleep on the plague so that it runs out what is inside it.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	Then know that the plague is saved if after three days or more it does not happen to the patient spasms or trembling of the heart or tightness in breathing, and sometimes other good dispositions of him; then know that the plague is healed; and then heal that with sweat and with the other cure within it so that it is healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	Then know that if the cure of him is excused and has been open for a long time, then know that it has already become a fistula; so heal that with its own capitulum.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the plague is by incision of a knife or lance, and it is simple on the surface of the foot or leg, then heal that with water that is preceded by stitching, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	Then know that if the plague has already gone into the bone and you have already cut those feet apart, then you should twist the plague and draw out those feet, if they are separated.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	Then if they are not separated, let them be within that the plague may be cured, which is to be taken out of them is pleasant.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And of the other plagues that happen in the other members, the help in the cure is the help of what I have said.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of the plagues of the belly.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The disposition that happens in the belly is either great or small or middling.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	Of the great there are four types of dispositions that are affected: the bowel or intestines, by which their interception and suture must be done with great care so that it is not too bold or too delicate.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And a small disturbance is difficult by any means, and if you do not protect yourself from the interception of them to their place soon enough, for it will be open and thickened by its instruments so that the instrument of it is made difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And therefore the best disturbance is middling, for in that there is not difficulty in reducing the bowel, but it is difficult in the two species mentioned before.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	Then know that a suture of the belly is in four ways: but two sutures are common to all other plagues of the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	But two others that belong only to those plagues, but mainly to the plague of the belly.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And I recommend to you each exposure and statement.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Then I say that when the plague is small and there is no cause of the bowel because of it, and it is difficult to reduce it, then it is in one of two ways: either by the smallness of the disturbance as we have said, or when the bowel is swollen by the cold air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And then, when it is like that, I say that you should wash it with a damp cloth or sponge in tepid water alone, or that you take it into the squint, cypress, spic and mix with it so that the bowel is within that the swelling is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And some say that they have found a solution in which there is stiffness, and it is better than tepid water alone to resolve the swelling.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	Then when you see that the swelling is resolved, then you should wash the bowel with water in which it is raised and cool, for by water the instrument of it is eased for a few causes.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	Then if the intervention of it is not necessary in this cure, then divide the disturbance with a small instrument into which the hemorrhoids are inserted.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	Then the first cure is best, when it is proper that there should not be an incision, and to take care not to dry up too much.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Regarding the instrument, say this about its shape:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	The one end of it is acute, and the other not acute, and the tip is subtle, and not so much as the edge of a blade is sharp, and its edge is bluntly sharp.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	Then when the plague is increased and there is discharge of the bowel, then know that its reduction must be according to the natural shape of it in its own place, if possible above water, for it is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	Then when the disturbance is great and it is in the upper part of the belly, then you should place the patient on his back, and pause his legs more than his head; and if it is in the lower part of the belly, then you should place his head higher than his feet.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	Then if the disturbance is in one of the two parts of the belly, then you should pause your attention and consideration for some time in fire so that the part in which the plague is may be higher than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	Then know that you should attend to those who are affected by great plagues and lesser plagues.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	Then in the small plagues, prepare water that is at your disposal, and make the minister between your most ready hands, which should have the entire disturbance under its control, and adjust the lips of it, and discover the cause of any suture there that does not belong to another.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	This is the common way of suturing: one that you take the needle, or count the needle according to the quantity of the width of the plague; and then leave the extreme end of the disruption of the little finger, and tighten the needle, or another that you do not put faith in the two extremities of the knot, two extremities of the thread that is left between the splits, within which you make the incision pass into that split; and then you have added two extremities of the knot and four orders.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	Then leave the needle with double thread on it, and sometimes add two extremities of the knot, and leave the two lips and the plague by addition; and then leave the thickness of the little finger and stop another needle in that, and then bind that one with a thread as you make the first, and do not cease to tie the thread until you have completed all the connection of the plague.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	Then let the fine and subtle needles be between them, for the subtle needles pierce with ease the flesh; and the thick ones are a difficult instrument in the knot, and so with water I say that they should be subtle in thickness and grossness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	Then I do not know that the needle is fixed in two extremities of the knot next to each other, so that the flesh is not pierced with ease and the plague does not take root before its consolidation.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And let them not be prolonged in suture so that the plague may not be prohibited from solidifying.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And you will cut the ends of the needles so that they do not remain sticking out of the patient's body over his or her hip; and you shall place over the suture the pulverized dust from all sides, which should hold the ends of the needles; and leave them there until you know that the plague has already solidified.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	And these kinds of suture threads with needles should be used in the following way for small wounds, since at least one needle or two should be left inside the wound.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	Then the second suture is made: and that you distribute the stitches in four parts, from one end to the other two ends of the stitcher, on a line, with the needle in a small roll wrapped in thinness and thickness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And when the needle has penetrated these four ends, you will reduce the needle from that end of the stitcher from which it begins, so that the thread retreats from the upper part of the wound, so that the suture is a second stitch on a stitcher on which the threads are tight.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And place between each suture the thickness of half the thread.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this suture is finished.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And in this suture I found the plague which was caused by a knife wound in the man's abdomen, which had been wounded for twenty-two hours. And I reduced that part from which the blood had flowed out.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the plague was solidified in the space of fifteen days or so, and he recovered; and it happened that there was a little fever, and it returned to its normal state.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And the other wounds had not been cured; and by a miracle they did not become infected, since I did not treat them with oil, because that part was where oil does not work and does not heal, but I placed over the plague a cotton pad for two days and washed it frequently with water inside until it healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	Then you made two kinds of suture according to the teaching of the Book of Wisdom:
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And that you begin the suture at the end, and insert the needle from outside to inside.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And so, with the needle penetrating into the end and into the middle of all the body, and leaving the tip of the needle at the end on which you have inserted the needle; and make the needle penetrate from outside to inside in the other end, from inside to outside, through half the body.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And when you have finished this penetration, then you will make another penetration in that part of the body where you inserted the needle; and leave the tip of the needle at the end on which you are working; and make the needle penetrate from outside to inside in the other end, from inside to outside, through half the body.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And make that penetration with your hand, with which you are working, in the middle of the body, in a part where it penetrates from outside to inside, through half the body.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And you will begin from that middle part, and cut it with the knife, and take out the needle from the end that is in the hip, and put it back into the end of the middle part, and take out that needle from the other end that is on the other side; and take out the needle from the end that is in the hip.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And you will make a cut and another cut, and you will make a cut and another cut, until you have made all the cuts according to that model.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the whole way of suturing is that you stitch the skin in such a way that the stitches are not seen; first, you stitch the end of the hip, and then you leave a small space between the ends of the stitcher, with the needle in a small roll wrapped in thinness and thickness.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	Then the second kind of suture, which is called the "Gulia", according to its name and description, should be used; it is recommended that you stitch it in such a way that it does not hurt the patient; and you will apply the end of this one to the other end of the body, and this is done as I have told you.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	Then you will take the needle and put it into the hip end of the body again, and make that same penetration in both ends of the stitcher; and then you will turn the needle and make that same penetration from inside to inside, between both ends of the stitcher.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	Then you will take those caps off, and make that same penetration in the other end of the body from inside to outside, through both ends of the body; and then you will turn them again, and make a new penetration in the other part of the body, from inside to inside, between two extremities of the middle part.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this way of suturing is better than the common small suture; it is a suture that I have recalled from my memory.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the teaching of Gulia
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And this is the teaching of Gulia: A stitch on the belly is fixed with two needles, so that you introduce it in any part with a thread, and begin the suture of those with oil; and make that needle penetrate inside the other end according to the way of suturing those which are coze;
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And you should know that when the disruption is in the middle part of the belly, then the suture is more difficult than for other parts of the belly.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	And the diagnosis of the plague is a judgment different from that of other plagues.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	And the cause is because when you see the recent plague on the body before it changes the air, and you return the intestine and stitch it well; then place over that powder that it turns red.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already changed the plague, then place over that powder which is around you in such a way that it does not hurt, and the threads will be solidified hip and side; and then heal those who have been touched by the powder as it is done for other plagues until it is healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	But if you do not see the medicines, then place over it for two days, because it begins to dry up, and exchange that part from day to day; and teach those who have been touched by the powder in such a way that it is healed, because you do not need other medicine in different arrangements when the plagues are simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	But if you are afraid that the common plague will spread to the principal members of the body, then place over it a wool bathed in water-soaked oil or rosewater; and leave that wool in the middle of the parts which are between the joints and let them dry it out.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if there is pain or putrefaction in the belly, since those are red, then place over it a black stinging mixture; and more so if the rot has reached the intestine and caused an exit through its cavity.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And you should know that those who have a thick belly are less likely to heal than those who have thin bellies.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And it is difficult to heal because that belly, which is called "gegunu", does not receive the plague that enters into it in all its parts; and this is due to the great number of veins that are in it and because of the size of it and because of its proximity to nature's nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	But if the powder that you have made from the plague is fine, and you have obtained it recently, then reduce those who are touched by the powder in the same way as you reduce bellies.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	If it has been passed the space and it is already made green or black, then you tighten that part where the blood comes out from him, because in the web there are veins and arteries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	Then cut what is another of that ligature, and place two extremities of the thread hanging from the part of the web which is фор him, so that above you is relieved the attraction of him to do what is necessary for your hand not to move in a way that can damage the web or hurt him.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remember the hernia when it happens in the intestine.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When it is disrupted in the intestine and it is small, then it is possible that it is restored in some men, because I saw him who was stricken by a lance in his belly on the right side of the stomach, and the plague was old and made a fistula, and he got dry and lost heat and air.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Then you continue with the cure of him already that it is not confident in the cure of him, but choose to make subtle that part which focuses the cure and the place is consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And you put that I saw the place already consolidated, wait over the patient who has an accident of bad in his belly; and don't give him anything for this accident and he breaks in two pieces taking food and drink, and enter in bath and exercises on their bodies.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And some experienced people have said that when it is an accident of the intestine and it is small, then take care that it is tied according to this way: and it is because you take fromigues of big caps; and then adjust the two lips of the hernia and place a fromigue of those which has the mouth open on the two lips of the hernia; so when you pull on those and tighten his mouth, cut off its head, because it sticks and doesn't dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	Then place another formiga next to the first one, and do not stop making formigas until you have done all the hernia.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	Then return that one and tie the hernia; and break those caps which are joined to the intestine when the intestine is cured; and don't cause any damage to the patient.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the intestine is held with a small thread which is made from the intestines of an animal because it is sharp; and it is because you take the end of these threads of the intestine, and it is a little bit dried up, and then place the end of that thread on a small hook, wrapped, and then put that hook in needles and cos with him the thread which is made from the intestines of an animal, and reduce that one to its disruption.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	This way of tying with formigas is not anything else but another way of confidence and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	Then if the hernia is big and wide, mainly because it is a subtile way of suturing with formigas; and it is not a cure of him completely.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	Of cure for the hernia and fistula.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	Do you know that all the hernias and abscesses are made when they are infected and become pus, and it is not consolidated and gets heat always, and doesn't get cut off; then, in any member, it is called a fistula, and we call that one of the zucham.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And the fistula according to truth is a nodacio feutrada and hard that it is white to which it is concave so when it is concave of pain from above; and for this reason it is called a little rice, that is, pain.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	It is in men who moisten themselves, which gets heat; and the moisture gets cut off in some hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	Some of this moisture is turned into powder and it is little and thick and subtle.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And I have seen it before in the division, so when you say that the hernias are all ulcers which are not cured and don' t exist in a dry skin, it is because of one of these nine reasons: one of them is because of bad air in the wound; or because of maliciousness; or because there is hard flesh between the lips; or because it is a mixture of liquid and solid things; or because the ulcer itself is bad; or because medicine is not suitable for his cure; or when corruption spreads in the region, and it is a plague; or because nature delays that cure from the poultice by virtue of its properties.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	I have already shown all these causes and pointed out those which are relevant to the cure with medicines in the division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	So that you can know how to cure a fistula which is made by surgery and not by nature.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	Do you know that fistulas happen in all members of the body; because some of them reach the veins and arteries, or nerves, or the spine, or the bladder, or any other part of the body, or to one of its joints composed by composition so that it comes from the main member and the foot; and some of them cause pain in the close proximity of the main member and similar parts.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And then that one of these fistulas which is according to this way is among the diseases of difficult cure and doesn' t respond to treatment; it is a waste of work and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	Then if it is one of the fistulas whose depth doesn' t reach those places which are said, and you wait and treat him, and you want to learn about it, then take a knife or a file, and if the fistula goes according to nature, and ask about that one with him.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	Then if the fistula is a twistedness, then investigate that one with a small knife of tin because tin rises and bends the web of the body; it is helpful for treating that one.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula is very large and ugly, then you cannot do anything about that sign with him.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Then open the opening by closing its holes because the moisture which makes you wet that one will pass through these other openings and run from them.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	Then ask very carefully, according to which way you can recognize if there is bone or a nerve; and it is the concave of the fistula which is far away or near, and it is a fistula with only holes and it is over that one completely with all your strength, with your interrogation, with which you interrogate the patient, and the invention of pain comes from your compression on him in the place, and signs of different causes and accidentz of the abscess.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And then you will see clearly all these causes at a distance; then, regarding the cure according to confidence: and it is because you consider that this fistula appears in a close place or in a far place from a joint, or of nerves, or of an artery, or of a vein, or of one of the parts which I have said.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then you clean the fistula according to what has been said before about its cure; and then take care not to cut off any part of the skin because it is formed there, or from the teeth, or other parts, and cure that one inside which can be healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	Then if the fistula is very deep, and it is following nature, then return that one in its sheath as much as possible; and then remove all the corrupted flesh from him; and then place sharp medicines wrapped in him, and put those within the concave of the fistula, which has been understood by iron.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And do so at those few spots where the acute medicine corrodes whatever is rotten in the cavity of the fistula of corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	Then restore that one by applying poultices on those spots from which healthy flesh grows until it is healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	But if it is not healed by this water, then you should cauterize that second one as we have just described.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	But if the cause of the fistula is bone and it should be made known to you, then you should inquire about that second one as we have just described, if you do not prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or main member thus far as we have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is discovered and it is in some corruption and darkness, then you should cut out that part where the corruption is completely located; and then heal that one with this water so that it may be healed.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	But if it does not heal and flows so as to form a pus, then you should know that you have not reached the total eradication of the corruption; and then discover carefully on the second side and precisely examine its cause and clean it completely with water, and then heal that one.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And so if it is healed, then it is good; but if not, then you should know that that corruption is in the distant depth of the body, which has not been reached, and then you must go there to discover it carefully.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	But if the bone is corrupted little, or if it is within your reach to throw it, then you should throw it with subtle tweezers which must be immersed in water.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	But if there are any bones, then you should carefully extract all of them, and do not leave any cause behind for your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	But if you have any difficulty with any causes of moisture, and in their incision there is neither fear nor mistake, then incise those layers or meats if they are here, and free the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	But if you have not prepared yourself to cut the bones with your knife, then pause on that water which you can collect, and leave that one within which those bones of meat and layers are, and keep the water which is not solidified, and the section which you have made with your incision so that it may be strong.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	In advance, if you are afraid, then pause on the piece immersed in vinegar, or a piece submerged in Egyptian oil, or one of the green poultices, because when those layers will have been cleaned, and the bones are separated from them, and this drawing is pleasant.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	But if it is a large bone like the spine or thigh or something similar to those, and that water from which it is corrupted is only on one side of it, then cut out that one completely behind where there is darkness and corruption, and then heal the wound.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	But if that water from which it is corrupted is a great part of it, and the corruption has already reached the bone's marrow, then you should close that one completely at the place where the corruption has reached, and then heal that one where it has been consolidated.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I recommend to you that you give water to a man in his space so that he pauses on it, and assists you with your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	Focus on a young man around thirty years of age, who has pain in his foot, and the separation dedintz is large on the inside of the body where the matter is reaching the foot, and this matter is pus with a great pus, and he does not have an external cause.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And then extend the time with that person for the error of the metges where the pus is increased, and come out with a large amount of pus, and his cure is delayed until the leg has an orifice, and it gets infected everywhere in the body's moisture.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And then his treatment is many times with different methods around two years, and he does not have knowledge of it but only in the art, until I was called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And I saw the leg of that man and the matter running from those orifices for a great distance; and his whole body was trembling, and its color was yellow.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then I intervened in one of those orifices and reached the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	Then I searched carefully all the orifices, and I found that pus was coming from all parts of the leg.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then I hid myself and incised on one of the orifices where I discovered a part of the bone, and I removed that corrupted one, and it was already dry and rotten and discolored; and one part of the leg had already been corrupted where it had penetrated into the shin.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then I held water which I had discovered and prepared the bone that had been uncovered.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	I knew that it was not in the bone but that corruption which I had removed and dried up, and I had already thrown it away.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	Then I resumed the healing of the wound with solidifying medicine for a long time, and it was not solidified.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	Then I returned and discovered on the bone second time where the first discovery had been made, and I continued to remove that corruption with the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And then I held water which had appeared after that corruption, and then I began to heal and restore it, but it was not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then I discovered another place where it had not been cut completely and carefully incised the small bone piece by piece and resumed the healing of it, and it was partially healed when I cut it around a palm's distance, and I removed its marrow, and then I resumed its healing with medicine, and it was fully healed and cured.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And no need for repetition in the operation of him and cutting him except by the disposition of his ease and because of his lack of tolerance and fear of death because it occurs at all times due to excessive vomiting of bad seizures.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And so it is cured completely, and there is nothing in the place of hard bone; and its goodness returns to it; and it remains in its dispositions, and does not cause any contradiction in walking or in any other cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	But if there is an eminent bone in the body already broken, then you should cover that one second time with this method: and it is that you hold the layer of wool and pull that one at its extremities, and command someone to stretch that one; and pause that layer of wool from the first layer; and then place that layer on the flesh which is separated from the bone, and stretch the extremities of that one so that you can cut the flesh where it is separated, and you discover the flesh on the place where you want to cut it, so that the cutter does not cut the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	Then hold the bone firmly or place it on a table carefully, because when you make water, it is not prohibited to cut the rotten flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And then hold the cutting on that place which is slightly corrupted, because if it is in the cavity of the bone and does not appear in its appearance to the sense, and force the cutting of another part.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is corrupted and not eminent, then cut one part after another continuously, and the corruption is in some place or another part, then you should discover all the meat; and then hold it firmly, and cut that one from the first part where there is corruption until it reaches the other part.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And be the cutting on the place of corruption a little, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	But if the corruption is in the joint, then incise that corrupted joint, and cut the bone where it continues from the other part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if from the corruption it is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in the reason but ingenious.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if corruption is in the chest of the hand or the foot, it is difficult; nevertheless, consider that you inquire about the corruption in which way it appears to you, and cut off what is necessary, and mend it according to each disposition which is possible for you, and if it is not opposite to your blood vessels or nerves.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And you know what incisions are made and the saws to cut these bones are very much according to the situation of the bones, and the preparation of them, and their thickness, and subtility and size and smallness, and hardness and their rarity; so that you prepare for all kinds of operations suitable instruments for that operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And you know that this operation means for you about the kind of instrument which you need; but you are a great study and long and knowing of the ways of this art, and witnesses of the ways of ailments, since indeed you have already for your own injuries experienced what is convenient for them to all instruments in all sorts of illnesses.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And I give you here at the end of this chapter the number of instruments which you shall employ in your prohibition which you will experience on others.
Forma de serra:	Form of saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Other form of saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Other form of saw:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Other large form of saw:
Forma de ray:	Form of chisel:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	The tip of this chisel is according to the shape of a star-shaped claw, and the points of it are according to the shape of the points of a star.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And they do not work except that you should cut off the tips of the joints when they are corrupted, or it is a large wide mouth.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Form of larger razors of the others:
Forma de razori menor:	Form of smaller razors:
Forma de razori lat:	Form of broader razors:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Other form of saw made with care: it is made with a sharp edge and the iron of it is sharp, and its member is a knife blade made with care.
Forma de lu:	Form of leather:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Form of razors in which there is a concave shape:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Other form of thinner razors:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Other form of razor with an extremely curved end:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Form of small razors resembling a tentacle:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Form of incisor which is cut into the bones:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Other smaller form of incisor:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Form of another incisor; resembling a chisel, and its end is sharp, and it is exhibited in many places in the ratio of the bones:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Form of saw which corresponds to the ratio of the bone-piercing hole:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	Its end is triangular and has an acute tip.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	It is made of Indian steel, and resembling that all causes which we have said of razors and incisors and saws.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	Of the extremities of incision and the locking of the bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The extremities can be cut either by intrinsic cause or by extrinsic cause, and if you treat that corruption with those medicines which confer cure, and the cure does not succeed, then consider that you cut off that member within this water which removes the corruption, so that the malice is removed from the limb by a greater disservice.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the sign of that to which it happens is that the member is cut off within, so that its blackness be removed before it is burned, or it is burned, or it is removed by the blackening of all the body; and therefore you cut off that member.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And it is caused by the corruption of some poisonous causes, as of a scorpion or of a snake or of a bat or of a weasel and in similitude.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or percussion is at the end of it, then you cut off that same and do not give space to the corruption so that it enters into the hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And if you come to the fire, then you cut off that part which comes from the tip of the fire, and do not give space to the corruption so that it enters into the fire of the arm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if you cut off that same, then you cut off the arm in the junction.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if another corruption passes and turns around the junction, then it is the death of the malice; and a quantity of virtue is administered in that cure.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And if corruption appears at the end of it, then you cut off that same within one of these.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if you take the whole foot, then you cut off all the foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	May it cause pain within the leg, then you cut off the calf within the junction of the thigh.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if the corruption has already spread to the leg, then it is not necessary but destruction, and let the malice die.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	And the way of cutting off a member or sawing it is that you strengthen your joint in the joining part, and another joint on the place which you wish to cut off, and extend the ministering joint to the joining parts, and extend another joint above them; and you separate the meat which is between two joints, and it is cut off.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And if it be not made to touch the place to which you wish to cut it, and if it comes to the malice's injury according to a just measure, and put on it a poultice of water.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	And if you come to the flow of blood when you work, then you cauterize that place carefully, or apply some dust on it which compresses the blood; and return to your medicine until it is completed.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And cut off a member that is infected with a strong joint, and care for that place in which it is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	I recommend to you that you go to a man in his foot, this accident which you and I have told about, which is how it happened that he was burned by the blackness in his foot from the fire-making.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that corruption first came into his calf within, which tended all his foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that man prepared himself by adding to his medicine more than he was able, so that the cure came upon him with speed and removed from it the pain and the burning of it; and he cut off that foot within the junction, and burned it.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	A long time ago, corruption came into his hand in the tip of the arm which is injured.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then I went to him, and so I pierced it with water which was applied upon his hand of the medicine, according to the proportion which I had determined for that purpose by considering the change in his condition; and the piercing of the water did not affect the superabundance, but began to work on his body; and the superabundance ceased not affecting him, but began to act on his arm.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And he called me to cut off his hand, and I did not wish to apply water with the intention of stopping that abundance, but I decided to cut off his hand directly; for the virtue of the malice was upon destruction.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And then he left me and returned to his own country; but I asked him, that man prepared himself, and I cut off all his hand, and he was healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I have not added to this narrative except that it is helpful for you who understand it; and according to which it will be understood, and in what way it should be interpreted.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	Of cure and the quality of a poultice with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When there is an abscess on some corpulent member and the space of the abscess is prolonged until it connects with the sanium (purulent fluid), then it is ruptured and perforated, and the sanium is discharged from it; then it is kept open for as long as one wishes, like a vessel, and the string that opens it up is tied with a thin cloth, and does not come to the last corruption, nor does it penetrate into the bone or nerves or ligaments, it is called sinus, and not fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	But if the space is prolonged until the corruption reaches a member, then it is called a fistula and not a abscess.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And the cure for it is that you pierce all that string completely, and most of all when it is thin and made with cloth, and make sure it does not stick to the area because of its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	But if you hope that the string will adhere and that that corruption does not come to the last consequence, and that the string has opened from the front, then you cure it with a rectal clister.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And consider the sinus, and if it is large, and the smell that comes out of it is strong, then clisterize it with an Egyptian medicine that is oil and vinegar and honey, and make sure it is placed in a vessel, and put on the fire so that the medicine boils and reaches its depth.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	Then take from it the water that is necessary and dissolve the honey and water; and clisterize the medicine in it for two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	Then remove that medicine with care; and make water for as many days until the sinus is clean and the blood is gone.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And some vegeations are clisterized with ash water, when this medicine is not present with you; and that you take the ash from the vine, and put it on the water; and then drink it and clisterize it in it so that you are sure that the sinus will stay closed.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine or ash water, then clisterize it with honey and water and mix it with honey three times, and clisterize it with honey and water, because honey has the property of cleansing and washing, and the vinegar makes the sinus adhere, and most importantly when there is a lot of stinging and dryness.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you make water a few times and are sure that the sinus has healed, then clisterize it with water that softens the flesh.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And take a little amount of the astringent oil and dissolve it with rose water and vinegar, or clisterize it with some medicines and other enguents that have the properties that I already mentioned in the treatise on enguents.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the orifice of the sinus is narrow so that the canula of the clister does not reach it, then you increase it little by little, and put a few layers of Egyptian ointment or basil ointment on it so that it is increased.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And if the orifice seems wide, then you add the sutures to the skin around it and put the same amount as before when adding to the canula.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the orifice from which the branch runs out is raised above the skin, then dry it in the pus that is below it so that the branch does not run out, because when the branch is constricted at the sinus peak the flesh becomes inflamed.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it is not possible to dry the sinus up to the pus base according to what you want, then you should pierce the member so that the branch runs out slightly according to your clothes and does not keep any reason for the branch to stay.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And take consolidation medicines that are placed on the sinus conveniently with water that you want to extend them over a cloth of linen.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And make the cloth as large as possible so that it covers all of the sinus; and cut the forfexs on the right side of the sinus orifice with a wide cut, one less than the width of the orifice; and extend over another linen cloth with lion's ointment according to the amount of the cut, and place it over that one for a distant position from the sinus orifice so that the branch does not move the cloth widely only once.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	But if it is on the sinus orifice, which is kept closed all the time so that water does not get into it and disturb the branch.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And so you know if the water that runs out from the branch is little or a lot, or is not digested or undigested.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And when you consider the location of that sinus, if the patient feels pain there or not, and if it is in the abscess.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And when your medicine has stayed on the sinus orifice in this way for a while and you see that the matter is attached to it or has become a part of it, then you change the cloth every three days, and when you change the cloth, replace the ointment.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	But if the sinus has a soft space with subtle viruses, then do not despair of the adhesion of linen, because the healing takes place, because some people heal more quickly than others and some take longer.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	If the sinus does not have a lot of pain for three days, then you know that the sinus is not attached; and if the adhesion of the sinus lasts and causes prolongued conditions, then you adjust the medicines to dryness, and if the medicines are humid in their substance and in their virtue, they become dry by adding oil-based ointment, when there is a lot of accumulation of addings.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the best aftercare is to take a little amount of astringent ointment and dissolve it in rose oil, and put it on top of vinegar that has been used as a cure for it, and use that one.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And it is good to do so in that way when there is no branch, astringent ointment, honey when it is thick inside so that it becomes thick, and use that; or take myrrh and aloes and grind them all together and add it to the honey when it is on fire, and tighten it with water over the cloth and tighten that one.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And sometimes they take a long herbal medicine and cut it with celestial lily (and that is the same as celestial lily) and flour from eru and centaurea, and use simple ones or mix them together, grind them and filter them and add them to the honey I mentioned; and do not eat it.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	If the sinus is prolonged and has not been healed with this cure, then you know that the infection is in the bone, or it may be in other hard members or ligaments; then you treat it with a fistula cure, which is what I mentioned earlier.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	Of cure for paronychia and nail scraping and cutting the finger and its section.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Paronychia is an abscess that comes off the nail of the hand or foot, and if it is prolonged and difficult to heal, then it is a small abscess with a deep cut; or it corrodeys the nail root, and most importantly when it corrupts all of it, and most importantly when it breaks into the bone below it so that it smells strongly, and the end of the finger becomes black.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And so, when you have that fever I spoke of in the division, and cannot endure your cure, then cover it up with a layer of iron, and cauterize the wound over it, for cautery is helpful in this illness.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is sound and the joint is healthy, and the joints of the joint are already beginning to be affected, they begin to ache and become stiff, then you should make a thin incision on the side of the joint where it hurts, and push that joint forward so that the medicine that burns can touch all of it, until all of it has been cleaned; and then cure that injury with ease.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	If the corruption has already entered into the bone, then you should cut into that bone and extract it, for there is no time when that bone is not cured until it has been removed.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the rust and corruption have entered into it [the bone], then cut that bone out according to how much of its memory remains, and then cure it with ease until it is healed.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	If the joint has been struck or cut, and there is severe pain in it, then at first you should pour [liquid] on the patient, and then dry up the joint with a sharp knife crossed over it, and be careful that the cut does not reach into the flesh next to the joint, for you will cause intense pain in the patient, and this will lead to unnecessary loss of flesh in that place; and then cure that place with water that soothes pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	And may it fit well, which is born from the flesh of many men, very strong is that flesh, and very strong is it in the bones, or very strong is it in the joint.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And some of them are born at the root of the joint, or their birth is in some of the joints that are said.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	And that which is born in some of those joints of the said things does not do harm, and that which is born in the roots of those things is very strong.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And of those that are born of flesh, the cut is shallow, and it is because you cut that joint with a sharp knife.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	And of that which is born at the root of the joint, the cure is difficult; and therefore be careful about avoiding it.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And in that which is born of the things mentioned above, at first you should cut the flesh of it roundly into the bone, and then tie it up with one of those convenient thongs [of leather], and then cure it with water until it is healed.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	And the consolidation that happens in those things between their movements or by birth of the man who has it, or by consolidation of plague or by fire, or by resemblance, therefore you should dry up that consolidation so that those things return to their natural shape.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And place them apart from each other, or place a thin layer of lead between them so that they are not consolidated too much, and separate them, or place a thin sheet between them according to how much consolidation there is.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And if by resemblance consolidation happens in some of the things mentioned above on the palm, then you should dry up that consolidation according to how it is prepared and make it fit to the shape of the member.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	Of incisions of times, there are varicose veins.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	And those are varicose veins, and those thick veins filled with superfluous melancholy fluids that come from the parts of the body, and they enter most into the legs, and primarily into the legs of those who travel or work or carry loads.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Therefore, at first you should administer a purge of black cholera from the body with strong vomiting, and then bleed the patient from the basilic vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	And the cure of them is according to two ways: one is that it is cut and that blood is drawn from it, and the other way is that the vein is lifted and all of it is extracted.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	And the cutting of it is according to this way: immerse at first the leg into cold water from which the large blood has been removed, and then tighten the leg at the hip with a thong, and then cut the vein in one place near the hip bone, and then lift the leg up high on the side opposite the hip bone with a thong, and then dry the vein in one, two, or three places with wide cuts, and then lift up the black blood from the leg at the other end of the vein near the hip bone, and then pour it out, and sometimes extract it all, and that tolerates the virtue of the medicine.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And then let him drink it, and order him to abstain from the foods that generate black cholera.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And repeat the cure by bloodletting when the veins are filled with blood, and then feel the patient.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	And the raising of them is according to this way: you should stretch out the leg of the patient, if it can endure, and then immerse it in water, and cut the vein in one place where it is swollen, and then raise up the black blood from the leg at the other end of the vein near the hip bone, and pour it out, and that tolerates the virtue of the medicine.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And then dry up the leg in the right side of the vein by cutting it in the long or back part of it, and then in the lower part of it, or in the upper part of it.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And then open the leg with nails and squeeze out the vein from all parts until it appears, and that is the appearance of it turning black.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And therefore if you let it flow and from the leg there comes white blood, then know that it is healing.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And then place those away from each other so that they are raised and taken out of the leg, and suspend it with an orange tree.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	And then dry up another section next to that section by three cuts, and then squeeze out the blood from the upper part of the vein until it appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	And then lift that up and cut it in the back part where it is to be taken out, and then extract that from the upper section until it appears due to that second cut, and then extract that which comes from that section that is above it.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And pour out that which you extract from the upper section or from all the sections until it is all extracted; and then cut that.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if you do not obey me in order to extract and lift it up, then introduce a sharp needle into it double and bind that up, or turn the leg inside out and roll it with your hand to all parts until it is turned over.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And be careful that it is not cut, for if it is cut, then you will find it difficult to lift that up and it will come back on the patient by that cut.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when you have taken all of that out, then place it on the spot of the plague where there is water and oil that is red and not red, and cure it with that which heals.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the wine has been contracted with a tortuosity in which it is wrapped up into parts, and that is not according to rectitude as we have said above, then you should open that up to all those parts of the tortuosity and places where it is wrapped up, and then suspend that up completely.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And be careful to cut those sections where you do not cut the vein or hurt that one, for it will be difficult to lift up that one, and serve your prudence in that one.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	Shape of the incisions made by water:
Forma de unci orp:	Form of a wound:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	No is to the wound as it is with the nails nor is of acute extremity so that it does not damage the vein; and it is of gross flexibility lion, for if it were subtle, it would damage the vein by its subtlety; and he has in its superfluous thickness also what we have said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	Of the extraction of a vein of the leg.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is generated in the legs on soft lands also as the Atenegy in land of Arabs and in lands of India dry and arid of little thickness and where there is no grass or spring.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And it is strong that is generated in other places of the body other than legs on lands.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And its conception is of decay that leaves the sinew also as venoms going in from inside the body snake and vermin and worms conceived between the sinew and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	And the signal of the coming of it is of this vein that occurs in inflammation violent; and the place is pricked; and then begins the vein to come out from the place of that blister as if it were a root of a plant.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And then take hold of the end and let him know that you have wrapped over that piece of lead of which the weight of one dragon is, within two dragons, and do not notice that and hang the lead from the chest.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And as many blisters as it has of cause to the outside, cover them with lead and do not cut that one.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if it is prolonged, then you cut a part of it and cover it with lead; and do not cut that one which is of root so that it is taken out, for if you cut it then it is contracted and enters into the flesh and causes decay and corruption in the place and bad ulceration.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	So that it be treated by covering so that is taken out little by little, until it is completely taken out and does not cause any cause in the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And of this vein is taken out in some men who are in the length of five palms and those are removed and I have already come to take out one of twenty palms.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is cut at the hour of its medicine, then introduce a sharp instrument into the center of it and perforate that one with a long instrument until all the blood has been evacuated from it, and administer decay of the place for some days with medicines; and then cure that one by the cure of ulcers.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein has some blisters when it is moved, and mainly when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and comes out from every opening, and is taken out from each opening.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And then cure that one also as we have said in the division and at the water which has been said above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	Of the section on worms generated under the skin and it is called bovine disease.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This disease is called in some lands the bovine disease because it has motes of worms under the skin and it is a poor vermin that is born between the sinew and the flesh, and goes all over the body and breaks out it at the joint and comes out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And its conception is by decay of some humors also as it occurs vermen and snakes and worms and ascars in the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is feared by the malice of it, for when it goes in the body and rises to the head, then it reaches the heart, then it breaks out from it and destroys it, and there are some blisters.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And then when you want to cure that one and extract it, do not do so if it is not possible except by a cut, and tighten it strongly and dry it on it, and then extract it.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is pushed into the flesh and you do not cover it, then you stop cauterization on the place where it lives, and the main cause that is feared is corruption of it as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	Perhaps if you see that one has reached the head next to the heart, then tighten it strongly on the forehead with a firm constriction, and then dry it out on it, and then extract it; and guard yourself from generating putrid humors by taking medicines to evacuate them.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	Of the section on disease of the nafir.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This disease is called in our land nafir, and it is a painful one that appears in some members, and then is confused from member to member.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And I have already seen that second that I recommend to you.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	He was called to a woman's home in a village, and I saw its arms and noticed a small swelling on the vein of the arm, and after an hour it seemed to grow smaller so that it did not disappear completely; as if it were living silver running from one place to another.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then he sat in the pain of that place and held himself there for an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	Then he went to the other body part where it reached the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And then I told him that he should twist himself around the whole body part as I saw it; and it was greatly amazed by the twisting of it and the speed from member to member.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I had already seen that second how to twist the arms as this way, but I have not seen the motions of the limbs that cause pain when they are twisted from member to member.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	But I did not see it with my own eyes how to twist the arms as this way, but I saw it on the woman.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And you did not consider it to be here because the woman was small, and its arms were revealed, and in this way appeared to the sense that same windiness.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that you do not appear in this way of regret for those who are delighted and have the body full of veins.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And when you want to cure it, and the patient feels pain, then do not appear in front of him as we have said; then tighten it on it lightly and dry it out on it, and then stop cauterization on the place where it is stopped.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	But if you do not see it with your own eyes, then heal it by exuding the body and expelling windiness, and apply those to the body that are foul-smelling and similar to those of seraphs and those that resemble them.
De extraccio de sagetas.	Of the extraction of arrows.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrows are different depending on their shape, and depending on the places of the body in which they strike, because their diversity is that some have large tips, and small ones, and concave, and flat, and those that have three angles, and those to which have tongues; and those that have star shapes.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And that which is according to the members and feet in which they strike is according to two ways: because the principal members are concaved as the neck, heart, chest, lung, skin, entrails, bladder, and their similarity; and then when you avoid the extraction of that arrow into those where death strikes it, and I recommend that you stop, then cover that one so that it does not die in the member where it strikes, and if an arrow does not fall into the depth of a member, then extract it and heal the infection.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And the symptoms of the throat are when they strike an arrow through the bone and it passes through it, and is taken out from its center where it is above the neck because it occurs violently as a result of soda and scotomia and dizziness and pain in the arms and inflammation of the tongue, and spasms and confusion of thought and vomiting of cholera, and it is strongly broken the word and destroyed the voice, and is taken out from the site of the infection as if it were a white pulp and has symptoms like those of a wound.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And so, if these signs appear in you, refrain from treatment or removal of the arrow unless it is necessary.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	May the arrow hurt when it enters the heart, so that it is near the left breast, and feel whether it is lodged in a hard place, and not in a soft one; and note whether its movement resembles the movement of the wrist, and its coldness the coldness of the extremities, and its itching and chapping, and fainting fits; and then you will know that death is certain.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And the signs when the arrow has struck the lung are a frothy cloud of black sputum from the throat, and vessels near the neck are constricted, and the patient's color changes, and they breathe heavily and ask for air.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the arrow enters the skin near the foot, and the pain is close to the small ribs, then a great amount of pain and gasp occurs, and all the member' s muscles become paralyzed.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if the arrow enters the stomach, then great pain in the belly causes no food to be digested.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if the arrow enters the belly and gets lodged there, then a rupture of the gut, or intestine, or hernia occurs, and there is no hope for treatment or removal of the arrow.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the arrow enters the bladder, and it comes out in urine, and causes some pain outside, and great pain occurs in the belly, then you know that death is certain.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	May the other members also be saved in accordance with the greatest dispositions when the arrow does not strike a vein or an artery and is not a poisonous arrow.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	I recommend to you that I have seen about these arrows, so that you understand the treatment for them.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	Which causes it, because in a man an arrow is shot into the lacrimal duct of his eye at the root of his nose, and I removed it from him on another side, cut off his hair from his ear, and it healed, and did not happen to his eye.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	I removed another arrow from a Jew which had struck him in his ear lobe, cut off his eyelid next, and the arrow was hidden, and there was none of it left except a small tip sticking to his earlobe, and it was a sharp arrow of those that the Turks use, with an iron point on it.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And that is the end of the story of the Jew, and did not happen to his eye in any way.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	I removed another arrow from a Christian which had struck him in his scalp, and it was an Arabic arrow, and that one was cut off at the hairline; and then I hid myself in front of it to protect it, and then I removed it, and healed the Christian.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	I removed another arrow from a man which had struck him in his belly, and I thought that he would die of it; and then, since it was not changed in any way after 30 days of treatment with various remedies, I hid myself in front of the arrow and pulled it out, and healed him, and did not happen to him any accident.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	I saw a man in whom an arrow had struck him between his legs, and the plague settled on him, and then, after 40 days, I hid myself in front of the arrow which was stuck in the root of his thigh.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	I saw a woman to whom an arrow had struck her in the belly, and the plague settled inside her, and it did not change its dispositions with respect to nature, and the woman did not suffer any damage in some of her natural faculties.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	I saw another man to whom an arrow had struck his face, and the plague settled on him, and it broke the arrow, not causing any harm to him, and resembling these signs.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	I removed the arrow from the Prince of the King which had struck him in his nose, and it had already slipped to the right side slightly, and the entire arrow was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	I was called to treat him for the arrow’s entry within three days.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	Then I turned the plague of the arrow slightly to the left side, and then I made an attempt with an intricate test, and did not feel it; but then she felt a sensation in her right ear lobe, and then she realized that that sensation was caused by the tip of the arrow.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	I applied an ointment to the place where it was necessary for me to look at the site of the arrow in order to determine its location, and then to treat it; and I gave myself time to think about how to treat it.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And did not happen to the site any accident that the arrow had achieved; and I continued applying the ointment to it for several days, and the plague settled during that time, and it broke out of his nose on the third day after he felt the arrow enter his nose; and then I removed the arrow from him.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	Then I applied an acute corrosive medicine to the plague for several days, and then, on the third day, I tested it, and turned the tip of the arrow slightly, which was attached to his earlobe with a string.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	Then I treated the plague with an intense medicine for several days, and then, after four months, I saw clearly the tip of the arrow; and that was my time to think about how to treat it.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	Then the plague got worse and I did not hesitate to use scissors to cut it off, and then I removed it, and then I healed the plague.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	The physicians said that the cartilage of his nose was not restored, and I healed it; then the plague settled, and he was healed completely, and there was no damage to him in any way.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	I recommend to you the quality of removing some arrows, so that you pause here and take into account what I have said about them, because the signs and definitions of those arrows are not understood by me in narrative form or in writing.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the artisan learns little by experience, but little by observation; and he who observes what is present here and what is absent there, understands the novel operations and new instruments for removing foreign causes of disease when they occur.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And I say that arrows are not released from the members in which they are stuck, but only for two reasons: or by attraction of the place where they are stuck; or by the opposite of the other side.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is released by its own place is either an arrow entering or a sharp instrument; and both are released from the body.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if you do not stop immediately when it enters, then be aware that the arrow will stay in your body for several days before you can remove the flesh from around it, and the attraction of it to your body and its exit will cease.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	And if it is stuck in the bone and you do not stop immediately, then leave it for several days, and repeat the process of attraction and moisture, and it will be released.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if you do not stop immediately after a few days, then be aware that you must pass a very fine needle through the course of the arrow in that bone from beginning to end, and then remove it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the arrow is lodged in the bone of the head and has already entered one of the ventricles of the brain, and appears on the patient's back some of those accidents that I have said, then refrain from extracting the arrow and leave it there as its nature requires it to be extracted after some days; for if the arrow enters the skull, death will not be prolonged.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrow is not lodged but only in the outer bone and does not enter the skull, and remains on the patient's back for some days, and does not happen to him any of those accidents that I have said, then you will invent a way to extract the arrow and the hand.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	But if it is not lodged and does not obey you in the extraction, then you will administer to him tarzels in the path of the arrow as I have said here, and cure the place where it is so that it may be healed.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	But if the arrow is already hidden in the place of the body and is hidden from feeling, then you will examine that person, and if you feel it, then you will invent some instruments for its extraction.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot do it on the patient because of the contraction of the plague and because there is no bone or nerve or vein there, then you will come from the front to the place where it is enlarged and where it can be extracted the arrow.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if it is lodged in the earlobes which are held, then you will free the flesh in which it is lodged from all sides as much as you can; and invent a way to extract it, if you cannot do it on the evasion of the flesh in the fracture of the earlobe and its twisting into itself so that it obeys.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in any place where it is, then you will use your hand with forceps at all times so that it obeys; and be careful to the last detail so that the arrow does not break and that its extraction is difficult and its extraction is carried out.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot do it yourself, then leave it for a few days so that the parts that are in its path can heal, and repeat it because when it is relieved.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	But if you have an opposite flow of blood, then you will administer to him what I said about the cure in its own chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And keep your virtue from cutting a vein or a nerve or a string, and administer to him at all possible ways of the extraction of the arrow; and do it with ease and calmness and delay and secrecy as I have said and you remember.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And so that the arrow is opposed so that the patient is according to the figure according to which the place of the arrow in him should be according to, for it is more convenient.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	But if that is not possible for you, then you will administer to him what is possible for you by figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	But if the arrows that come from the opposite side of the body or if you already feel any of the parts of the outside on the inside through the cord near them and make the arrow emerge; then you will cut it off completely; and do the section according to the amount in which the forceps hold it; and throw it away, for it is done lightly at little risk.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	But if it is lodged in the bone, then you will twist your hand according to the opposite motion until the arrow enters the bone, and amplify that itself, and extract it.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	And if not, leave it for some days, and repeat it within what is burned.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the head of the arrow is in that, then you will push it towards him.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	But if the head is fallen and you want to administer impact, then you will put it in, if it is deaf, a loud noise so that it enters between the concave part of him on the tip of the arrow, and push it towards him.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	But if the arrow is concave, then you will push it with a strong instrument that enters into the arrow, for the arrow is relieved by that.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the arrow is poisoned, then you will cover all the flesh in which it is with a substance that suits it, if it is possible for you to do so, and cure that with water that suits it.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the arrow has entered the foot or the stomach or the bladder or the rib, and it is close to touching so that you touch it with the attempt, and you can cut it off, then cut it off, and if you have trouble with it, then clean it, and cure that where it is sore.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	The shape of forceps that arrows are thrown:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	The handles of the forceps that are made with serrated blades that are formed when they grasp the arrow so as not to let it go.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And of those are made special threads, large, small and thin, according to the quantity of the greatness of the arrow and its weakness, and the width of the plague, and the contraction of it.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	The shape of a loud noise from this curved end that is like the blade of an awl so that it enters the arrow into him, and a push from that deaf one:
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	The shape of a push from that deaf end:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	and move it with a push so that it enters the concave part of the arrow, and is pushed towards it.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	Of bloodletting from veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so .xxx., de las quals so en le cap .xvi., so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins from which the blood is let out are those that commonly bleed. of those that are in the head. And these are the veins that bleed from the head: the six in the forehead, two in the temples that are called temporal, two in the upper lip that are called maxillary, and two in the lower lip that are called mandible; and these are the veins that bleed from the face: those that are above the ear that are called auricular, and those that are below the ear that are called submandibular; and these are the veins that bleed from the neck: the six in the back of the neck that are called dorsal, two in the sides of the neck that are called lateral, and two in the front of the neck that are called carotid; and these are the veins that bleed from the chest: those that are in the breastbone that are called mammarian, and those that are in the lung that are called pulmonary.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so .v.; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	But the veins that are let out blood in the arms are five. But one of those is a cephalic, and it is called wild lat. It is called by the people "the vein of the head", and deaf, and it is a migrain vein, and it is composed of one ram of the basilic, and another ram of the cephalic; and that one is called by the people "vein of all the body", and the basilic is called when paused on the domestic lat. It is called citillar, and those are called common those who are let out blood in the arms, and it is paused over the fire, and that is where it is let out blood, and is called the one by the people "vein of the stomach"; and it soars over the poutz by a manifest appearance; and the save-child, and that is the vein that is between the two ears, and has two ramps.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And in the foot and the back are three veins: the one of those is that it leaves the curvature of the denil of the wild linen; and the second is sofened, and the place of it leaves the back of the domestic linen; and the sciatic vein, the place of it leaves the back of the wild linen; and on the back are other veins similar to those.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The healing of veins that run close to the ears is due to gentle cold and moist heat and the avoidance of scaring and ulcers on the head.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of stopping those is according to whether I return to you: it is that I cut off the head of the patient, and I wipe the head of the patient on the occiput in the place of both veins with a broad cloth so that they are well rubbed; then fasten the patient's head with a bandage until both veins appear and the places of their endings under the ears on two places deeply buried from the head; and test it by the third finger, and if you feel the pulse of those by the third finger, here it is not to be tried.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Then take the knife, and that is which pierces, and you put it in the cave where the vein enters until the blood comes out on the bone.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	Then lift up your hand to the vein and the tendon at their branches and cut the vein with an incisive cut.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And be the length of the incision the quantity of two fingers or more of water; and make an incised scar as large as you wish.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then bind it with poultices and let it rest until it is healed.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And already before the beginning of this book, the incision of those and their cauterization have been described.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	More than two veins, which provide blood to the head, is due to ancient emigration, as well as a sudden and evil fever, and frequent headaches and sharp pains in the joints, which are discharged through sweat on the skin.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of bleeding those is according to whether I return to you: it is that I bind the patient' head with a bandage until both veins appear by the clear pulse and are shown by the third finger, and then you test it by the third finger; and if you feel the pulse of those by the third finger, here it is to be tried.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	Then lift up the tendon in order to open the vein until it appears by the third finger, and pierce it with a sharp knife from inside, and lift up the vein above; and cut those in the same way as you have done in the two veins; and make the wound according to the quantity of your need.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then take off the bandage from the patient' head and place the third finger on the vein for an hour, then place a poultice on it and bind it tightly; and leave that until it is healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And already before this reminder has been described, as well as their incision and their attraction at the beginning of this book.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And therefore the healing of the vein of the forehead is due to ancient emigration, as well as a fever, pain and ulcers in the head.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of bleeding him is according to whether I return to you: it is that the patient' head be bound with a bandage until the vein appears; and then take the instrument which is called a scissor, whose form is this one.
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then place the pointed end of the scissor on the vein at the top of it and strike it with a hammer or in any other way that you wish, and make the wound run according to the quantity that you want; and then take off the bandage from the patient' head and bind it where it has been cut until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	And some veiny are opened by bleeding, but it is not known that bleeding is of acute extremity as the others, before its extremeness, but it is opposite to its extremeness; and those are bled according to the transverse direction, for the bone is hard and strong, and would be torn apart if bled in a certain way.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	And the healing of two veins that are near the eyelids is due to a fever, pain and swelling in the eyes, as well as a fever, pain and ulcers on the face.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	And the quality of bleeding is that the patient' head be bound with a bandage, and then bleed those, and you stand over the patient' head.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And it is bled according to the transverse length a little bit, for in that place there is no flesh; and if bleeding is subtle, its extremeness is broken.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Then make the wound run according to your need as much as you want, and place poultices on them, and bind those tightly by a knot; and then take off those.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	And the bleeding of the nose vein is due to an acute fever and a violent pain in the face, as well as a fever and emigration that occur in the face, and mostly when it is ancient.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of bleeding him is that the patient' head be bound with a bandage, and then take his left hand; and cut off a little blood from his nose, and let it fall into the place on the patient' forehead according to the right direction, for the vein does not appear here, and because the wound begins to run as soon as it starts.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	And you hold your hand over the blood little by little and let it run as much as you need; and then take off that bandage, for that wound is healing a little bit.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	And the healing of the bleeding of two veins is due to constriction, as well as the beginning of leprosy and many bad diseases and violent pain and corrosive ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And the quality of bleeding those is that the patient' head be bound with a bandage by a knot; and place the patient on a table; and the surgeon stands over the patient' head, and the patient sits on a chair.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	Then cut off the vein at its end with a wide and small bloodletting, and then take the blood as much as is necessary or more than that according to need; and then do the same with the other vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	Then take off the bandage and bind those veins with a little tightness in order that the patient may not be choked; and leave them within the body because the plague is healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	And the healing of the bleeding of those veins is due to little blisters, pimples and pustules in the mouth, corruption of the gums and bad ulcers and cracks; and to bad ulcers that are in the nose and in the passageway of breath.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	And the quality of bleeding those is that you cut off the patient' nose before you, and bind it with a bandage, and then open his mouth and look at two veins from which one is on the right side of the lip and the other on the left; and the darkness of either one is shown by its darkness, and more so because those veins are small black ones; and then cut each one by an incisive cut.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	Then if you have doubt, leave it to me; and do not know which of those is which, then you turn your attention to the larger of those, and to the manifest pustule of those.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	Then make the incision of the two veins that are on the lips in front.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	Then bind those veins with a bandage before you cut them; and then cut those two veins that are on the lip.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	And more than two veins that are behind the tongue is due to bleeding from the forehead to pre-focas that are in the mouth, and to the disease of the uvula and diseases of the mouth.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And the quality of bloodletting is that it follows the patient between your breast and sun, and raises his tongue, and watches under the tongue, from one side he draws blood and from the other side draws blood, and the color of each is falling to blackness.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And then start to bleed each one; and be careful that you do not stop your hand in bleeding those, for behind them are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And your veins that are bled in the thigh are those from which blood usually flows in all men, and the bleeding of them is done according to two methods, either by sticking a blade to the skin slowly or by cutting with a razor, and if it bleeds, this is the way of doing it:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this bleeding is that which leads to section, and those are special thin and fine according to the width of the veins and according to the constriction of them.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Method of bleeding with a blade:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	Is the blade to be held several times, and is that the cavity of the leg opens full-fledged, and to those that contain thick blood turn back.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	This is the way of bleeding with a razor:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And this bleeding is of small width and very fine end, and leads to the bleeding of veins that contain subtle blood with a subtle citrine color.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	May the improvement of bleeding the bazal vein which is one of three veins; because it leaves the blood of the pains that are behind the throat and from there that it severs the feet and the belly.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And the person who bleeds that vein, when he bleeds it, should keep it safe and be careful in the puncturing of the bloodletting, for behind it is an artery; and if he makes a mistake and cuts into the artery with a razor, it will cause a flow of blood, so that it is necessary that no one bleed it with a sharp blade, before bleeding it with a blunt one.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the bazal does not appear by a clear sign, then be careful that you do not bleed it and move to the other one, or seek some ram of wheat; or bleed it in the place where the arm ends, for it is clear; and cut it with a razor after bleeding it with a blade.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	And if you want to bleed the hand, then be careful in front of the tightness of the arm that touches the place within which you know the location of the wrist, and bring your hand close to it; and then raise the arm and cut the vein with a razor after bleeding it with a blade as mentioned above; and be careful that the blow does not reach a certain place of the artery.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	And when you see it with strength, you inflate it in the place that you have touched on the wrist, then this inflation is an inflation of the artery, and thus let it go.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if the blood flows in bleeding it like a child's cry, and the blood is thin, then know that it is the blood of the artery; and you lie down and pause your hand on it for a long time; and then stop the pause, and if the blood is separated, because separated blood is separated, then you strengthen your arm and let it go.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And keep the patient from moving his hand, and be careful of him not to hurt it for a few days until he is healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	And if the blood is not separated, and you see that medicine does not help with water, then you cut the artery, if it appears to you; because its end is contracted, and the blood is separated; or that you take a piece of leather, and insert it into the fistula, and pull one half of it, and tighten it over the place of the vein with a knot within the skin and within the dust within the next day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And if the blood is separated, then it is good; and if not, then heal that hand with water from which the memory of the dust of separation comes out in a flow of blood.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	The separation of the blood from him is difficult due to the small place of the fistula and the possibility of hurting the arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	And the blood that comes from the venous circulation is more beneficial than that which goes from the cerebral circulation and from that which goes to the head, as mentioned above.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And be careful with the person who bleeds him, for behind it is a nerve; and if he makes a mistake in puncturing the bloodletting and cuts the nerve, it will cause stupor, and the recovery of it is difficult, and it does not heal completely; and those nerves appear to you when they are felt; and if they are hidden from some people and are subtle and do not show themselves, then be careful that you do not bleed him in front of them, and avoid the nerve with your hand.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if the vein is between two nerves, then you open it along its length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The improvement of bleeding the cephalic vein is that it attracts blood from the head and relieves the pains of the ears.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And in this specifically, if you want to bleed it with a razor that bleeds it like bleeding with a blade; for it is the safest of all veins, because it does not leave the artery or the nerve behind.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	However, it is necessary for you to make sure that when you bleed him with a blade, you do not cut his throat too much, and look for the place that is less sensitive, and do not hurt him with the first blow, which is made on it with bloodletting.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	But a strong pain is felt by some people when it is bled for the first time, and it does not show itself on that person.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	The quality of bloodletting with that vein and the accidents of it are what you have to consider in its correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first of it is that you should know that bloodletting is not administered unless the health is preserved and in the hope of it and with caution of its occurrence of pains, and that it is done in one of the veins that are in the thigh, which are: cephalic, fetal, and basal; and that it is done at the beginning of spring, at the start of summer, and in winter approaching the feast, when signs appear of fullness.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And it should be done after three hours of that day.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	However, bloodletting is administered, and when it leads to convenience and necessity, or in the morning or at night, at any time and for all times.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And it is that it does not bleed before the age of twelve years, and women do not bleed unless they are past the age of seventy years, and those who have already passed the age of sixty years do not bleed.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And if anyone wants to bleed in any way, then he should mark his Buddhas in front of the bloodletting with a leonine clister, so that the veins do not draw excesses in the bloodletting of the Buddhas, which are useless, and do not harm the main members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And do not bleed the sick person who has a headache and vomiting, or a stomachache, or multiple reasons for sleeping or working or staying awake or eating; all of which break the virtue, either in the body or in animals.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And now consider in subtile way of humors before him if the sun is big, have food and drinks, and medicines if it is possible to him to that.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And now enter into a bath if any cause does not prohibit, or exercise for some exercise so that the sun is subtleized.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And pause the bloodletting from him on the foot of the day, so is it 3 hours, then thus have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And persevere that the foot of him is guarded in that day of all animal accidents, then if it is anger, fear, and of all bodily accidents, then if it is work and unnecessary pain, and similar to them.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And at his seat let it be present the causes in the use of which commonly men are used to aromatic and odorative and to balms and similar to them according to the quantity of the possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And follow the bloodletter on a cushion that is put or the cushion of him that should be bloodletting.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And now draw his arms, and rub him with the bloodletter two or three times; and now tighten the ligature with a ribbon and wrap that two times.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And be the tightness careful, because the tightness when it is not tightened, or the tightness is to the superfluity, then prohibit of flowing from the sun; or is to the tenderness, and the sun's joints' examination.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And now tighten it, cover that which should be bloodletting rub his hands together between them before the veins are swollen and declared to the feeling.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And now the bloodletter oil unse his bloodletting with a little of oil properly; and now pause his left hand on that vein, leave the place of which he wants the bloodletting, so that the vein runs a little, and the percussion stops because from the veins is the one that disturbs then if the heart runs away deves the bloodletting, and of those is that it is full of ventosity and when pauses the bloodletter on that it is contracted deves the bloodletting, and is discovered the bloodletter; and the bloodletting does not open the vein, and if it opens, that is contracted.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And therefore, for that which the bloodletter is stopped and is sought in all these causes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And now pause the bloodletting, maybe if the vein is found in a cushion, then do so; and otherwise, return to that place a little, or over it at feast if the place is not found.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the place is found or the patient is afraid, then leave it for a day or two, and do not tighten the ligature, because the blood will flow strongly after that; nor enter into a bath.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And now return the bloodletting if it likes.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the appearance is little and the sun is subtlely, and you are afraid that it does not get the quantity that you want, then return the bloodletting in this second according to rectitude and adjust in the appearance a little, and make that before the place is found or it is apostemated, because the place is apostemated in most men deves few appearances.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	Maybe if times that has apostemated already, then do not return over it, because it does not excuse you any cause; and pause on that some part of the oil' fenda, because it strengthens the sun's joints.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And is better in this place that oil and that the other oils.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	And seemingly administer oil' fenda in all bloodletting when the veins are prohibited from the sun's cors, and make that before that place, because the sun is subtlely and is turned when it is big.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if in the place of the bloodletting is born a big apostema, because it happens that the appearance of the vein or that of the vein is little, and more often to that which does not run blood but that appearance, or in the appearance of a vein little, then you fawn, and pause on that location sponge infused in water and salt, a little burned, and tighten it for an hour, because it dissolves.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And now make that before the appearance of the sun from that vein with the addition of him or another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if it remains in that place for some days any blackness or greenness, then do not notice it; and if you want to, pause on that cause of aloe and of myrrh dissolved, or any cause of mint juice or of bitterness or similar to it.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	And so the appearances of the bloodletting of the base are.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And therefore pause your hand on that, and if you feel that the hand is tender deves your compression on that, then that eminence is bad and evil; and then guard you that you pause over that any cause of water that we have said, because it will flow strongly from the sun' artery.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And make that plaster with the water in which is tightened, so that the place is hardened, and now care that with another cure it is cured before that be healed.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And now extract from him all man according to the quantity of his virtue and according to the winning color above the sun according to that appears.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	Because if the sun is black, then you leave it to be extracted before that is won; and seemingly if you make the sun big, then you leave it to be extracted before that is subtlely; and seemingly if it is hot, before that is lost the acuteness of it.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And if that is full and strong and has need of the bloodletting of the sun in a cushion, then be made large the bloodletting of the vein and the bloodletting is made long.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And in that which is happy, be made its opposite, and now extract that in two cushions, and that the two be tightened.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	And the best that is administered in bloodletting of a vein is that it is the transverse section, not piercing.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	And this way of bloodletting saves the flow of the sun and the injury of the nerves, and is most laudable and most saved that bloodletting according to latency and length.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And to that which is used to happen syncope deves the bloodletting, and now cure that before the bloodletting with a little of bread infused in milk of granulas or of simple syrup burned; and extract from him the sun in three cushions or four.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if it is chilled of composition, then drink before the bloodletting infused in oil of myrrh or in oil of honey flavored with spices that is like to it, or in aromatic oil and similar, or in oil flavored with spice.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if it happens syncope deves the bloodletting, and is cause of that another sun runs out, then leave that before the bloodletting drink water of meat and infused oil with a little odorant; and use aromatic to the like of it, and keep his feet on that.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use of the other causes that we have said in the division in the chapter of syncope for evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And who wants to try his arms and dissolve his sun according to the second appearance, leave that of which the bloodletting is by a small evacuation, and its virtue is joyful, then try to dissolve his sun day after day according to the quantity of the virtue in the continuous days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	Maybe who wants to try his arms, and get his sun according to the second appearance, and his sun is strong, then make that before the seventh hour or nine hours after the first bloodletting.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	Maze who want to throw the thread of the corset down should do so in the opposite direction to that from which they descended, for it should happen on the second or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	If the corset in which there is a thread already torn and it has grown worse and increased fever, then take off the thread from one side of the body and from the other much quantity and amplified the opening within which takes place syncope, since you have preserved all conditions of phlebotomy; and pause your hand over the wrist of him who wears the corset of the thread, so that he does not die in place of syncope, because of the veining it happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and careless.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And do not do when you want to untie the arm and evacuate the thread second time, since it has already closed the orifices of the vein and it is difficult to remove the thread from the body, that you press firmly on this with vigour and extend it slightly, for it is too bad.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	While you are waiting for the phlebotomy to be second; or remain there where the vein is coagulated with the thread; or pause on it with a taraxach (a type of medicine) or sagzenea (not sure what this is), and press slightly on it while the thread comes out.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein is burst, then leave that one alone and do not touch it until the burst has subsided.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if necessity forces you to evacuate the thread second time, and there is no excuse for it, then leave that one on that place or in the other arm in another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the vein called "funis del bras" (brave's cord) is phlebotomized in place of the arm or the leg, because they are not stretched or veined, since it is composed of them.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	And the quality of the phlebotomy of him is that the patient puts his hand in cold water until it turns red, and that the vein appears clearly.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	Then tighten it on this with a ligature at half strength; and phlebotomize second according to the small transverse, not longitudinally or according to the length.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	Then open it widely and do phlebotomy on this at the joint of the hand a little bit.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if it is forbidden for the thread to flow, then you repeatedly put the hand in cold water and leave the thread run into the water until you achieve your need.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	Maze if you were in the summer days, then you are excuse from the repetition of the hand in cold water, and the month is paused the thread in cold water during the winter time.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And the phlebotomy of this vein is more safe than that of all the other veins, because he does not have a pulsating vein or a nerve.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And the phlebotomy of the right arm is made according to the maladies of the neck.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of the phlebotomy of him is that you tighten the hand with a ligature or with your hand, because you have put it in cold water, until the vein is inflamed and clearly shown; and then phlebotomize it transversely; and if you cut it from all sides no one will see it.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And keep your hand away from the phlebotomy, because he does not have the nerves of the naked flesh of the neck.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	Then repeatedly put the hand in cold water and leave the thread run into it, because if you do not repeatedly put that one in cold water, the thread will coagulate at the orifice of the vein, and it is forbidden to flow.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And when the thread is extracted according to the amount of necessity, then you pause on the vein oil and salt, so that it does not harden completely; and apparently it seems that you do all right.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	Maze the refreshment of the phlebotomy of that arm is that it is made according to the diseases of himself.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And make a phlebotomy on him like this when you have made one on the other.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And the refreshment of the vein sephena with phlebotomy is made according to the diseases that are in the beginning of the year, as those of the mother, and the retention of menstruation, and the diseases of the cheeks and ulcers of the legs and old wounds, and their apparent diseases of the mentioned ones.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	And the quality of the phlebotomy of him is that the patient puts his hand in cold water and makes a friction on this until the veins appear clearly; and places over the joint of the hand a thong; and the place of the vein I cut apparently with a knife, and from that one it branches into the face of the hand many times.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And so phlebotomize the top wide or cut the skin apparently with a knife before the addition of him, since it is better and safer.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you phlebotomize that one on the face of the hand, then you keep away from the nerves that are under it on the face of the hand, and do phlebotomy according to the transverse, as if you want to cut it.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	Then be careful.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	Maze if it is forbidden to remove the thread, then you repeatedly put the hand in cold water and leave the thread run into it until it is removed.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the phlebotomist makes a mistake in the first time, then repeat the phlebotomy a little bit, because the place is safe; and do not fear from it, but keep away from the nerves as mentioned before.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And make of the other hand like this when you have made one on this.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And from the sciatic vein, the place apparently mentioned before is cut off from the beginning of the year.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And the refreshment of the phlebotomy of him is made with care when it is done by mistake with a cold cauterizer.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the quality of the phlebotomy of him is that the patient enters into a bath, and walks quickly and tightens his belt on the waist of him from four times in a long and thin string, because it does not appear except by doing so.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And so when it appears, then you phlebotomize that one according to the small circle and the transverse, and it is better; or cut that one with a cutting instrument or dry it by drying it out, because the place of him is safe.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And it is in one man after he has made a small circle, and if you cut that one, and it appears to you in the shape of a letter M, then phlebotomize any part of him, and this is what appears on the two sides of the ear, and the second finger.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And keep away from the nerves, and let the thread run as much as you want.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	Then untie the constriction and place over the location of the phlebotomy knot and tighten it slightly, because it is healing slowly.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Of windiness and of the qualities of using those.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Of the windiness of horns, or of earwigs, or of vermin.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	The windiness is done according to two ways: the first one is by cutting and removing the thread, and the other one is by windiness of the cutting.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this windiness that is cutting according to two ways: either it is done with fire or by fire.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And the windiness that is administered according to the cutting and removing of the thread are twelve places on the body, of which one in the middle back is uncutable, and it is the last part of the head; and the second place from the two parts of the neck behind the jawbone on the right side and under the chin; and windiness from two spatulas; and windiness of alohoster; and this is done over the edge of the cloak; and windiness of two lights, and they are of two bras; and windiness of two cavilles; and windiness of two cups.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	And if it is necessary to extract the blood from the patient through venesection, it should be done only from the small veins in the flesh, for then the virtue of venesection will not be lost; nor does venesection have to be done while there is fire or heat present in any illness due to the accumulation of fluid within the body.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	But if necessity compels venesection for an illness or constantly, we should do it at the beginning of the month and at its end, and in the place of bloodletting and at any time as needed.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	Which cause is that in which men have an excess of blood within them so that they must extract it by venesection and the excess becomes heavier and more viscous; and those in whom there is an accumulation of fluid and rigor in their face and head, and colic and darkness and dullness in their eyes; and those from whom the blood comes out with the venesection; and those whose appetite increases; and those who taste blood in their mouths, or whose tongue is swollen with it; and those who have a lot of sleep; and those who sweat while they are asleep, as well as other similar symptoms.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And so, when there are such causes at times, and especially if it is in the third or middle part of the month, then we should order venesection to be done before two or three hours have passed.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And the immediate venesection of the back is that when it presses down on the head and causes water to come out from the ears; but above all, that the whole body be completely evacuated.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	This venesection is in the place of phlebotomy of the cerebral.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it is not good to use blood from a patient who has a cold fever, because it does great harm.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	So that we do not use old blood, nor in cases of jaundice or yellow fever.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	But to those for whom the venesection is continuous and prolonged, we should order the venesector to pause his hand at the venesection point for a short time, out of fear of causing oblivion.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	And venesection with vinegar is in the place of phlebotomy of the femoral vein and the bazillar; and that causes asthma, and contraction of the air passages and their splitting apart, and coughing, and accumulation (of fluid).
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	So that venesection with vinegar be a little reduced, because if it is paused for a moment, it causes weakness in the body and in the stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And venesection with almond water causes accidental pain in the head and eye problems, and migrains, and pre-fever, and pains in the teeth; and it is in the place of phlebotomy of the bazillar.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	So that you order the venesector not to press too much on the venesection point, so that he does not hurt the artery and cause a sudden flow of blood.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And venesection of the jaw causes alcohol in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and similar symptoms to those of other illnesses that originate in the mouth; and it is in the place of phlebotomy of elsewhere that is in the two lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	But venesection that is done on the two spatulas causes caphaine, which is caused by warm fluid.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And venesection of the two internal parts of the mouth causes renewal of the blood from the three veins, since those are drawn from the small veins in the flesh, and those veins are thicker than the other veins within the body so that the attraction can reach the three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And you should order the venesector not to make any cuts, because the place is naked of flesh and has nerves and arteries.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And this venesection causes hemorrhoids in the anus and ulcers in the anus, caused by venesection.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	So that you order the venesector to make a large incision, because the place deserves it and calls for it; and a sharp blade should be used to cut it, and let it blood if needed during the venesection process.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	But small venesections should be made by a clear and evident incision, because they draw the blood from all the body, cause old pains in the lungs and the liver, and the bladder; and they bring on menstruation, and cause diarrhea and constipation; and it is in the place of phlebotomy of two veins, and alhorcoben, and two kavils.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	But they quickly destroy all the body and cause syncope in certain people.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And from venesections of alhorcoben, renewal is more beneficial than renewal from venesections of two legs.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	And the quality of the position of the venesections is that you should pause the venesection at the beginning and let it flow slowly, and do not prolong the position of the venesections, but rather pause them slightly, and hold them tightly, and let the humors come to their place by gradual arrival.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not stop or continue it; carry on until you see the place turn red and swell up, and feel the heat of blood.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	Then order to let the blood flow slightly, little by little, and consider the disposition of the body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	For a person who has loose skin, you should make a single incision and not stop it, so that the place is not ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And order the venesector to increase the incision slightly and let the blood flow easily.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	If the blood is thick, then you should make two incisions, because in the first incision the way of subtleization to the blood and its liquidity is opened.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	But in the second, to the acquired scrutiny of the gross extraction of the blood.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	If the blood is very thick, then venesection should be made in the third incision so that it achieves the last one.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	And finally, when we want to extract a little blood at a time or a little bit, a single incision is sufficient for us.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	If we want to extract a certain amount of blood, make an incision with a sharp blade; and if we know that the blood is thick, then cut it with a wide one.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the term for incision in which the depth of the cut is just right.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if the skin of that person is thick, hard, black and the pores are tight, then make the venesections slightly longer, more open and resolute; if it is in summer, then use oil from aloe or violet, or rose water, or chamomile water, or honey; and if it is in winter, then use olive oil, or mint oil, or sage oil, or sage water.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the sweat is thick, then use oil that is fragrant, or olive oil, or myrrh oil, or aloe oil, or mint oil, and similar oils.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	But if the venesector has large pores, then it is prohibited to use oil, and that the places where the venesections are made should be cleaned with a slightly damp cloth or with cold water from a spring, or with water from a well, or with water from the sea, and similar liquids.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And if the blood is very watery, then clean your venesections with wine or water of pomegranates and mulberries, and similar liquids.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And of that from which the excesses are thick, wash your windows with cold water or with spring water, which is more bitter, or with aniseed infusion, or with chamomile, and their similar.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And where the windows have been washed in advance of bathing; and after having been administered immediately next to the bath for an hour or two, and after having slept with the windows open.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What is it that should be done so as not to cause wound-making during venesection?
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	And where you consider the beginning: if the wound-maker is coleric and winds over it fresh blood and inflammation, then if it takes cold-causing causes, put in place acrid milks, and endive with vinegar and lettuces, and secant and julep, and their similar.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And pause their food as well with peas, and meat of small birds, and seasoned food, and their similar.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And of that from which the complexion is pale, if it takes honey-water or almond-water infusion with sumac and a mild wine between wheat and nougat; and that to it be commanded that it use little water and eat, and pause its food as well as peas and canabish and pissers and petiz birds and pigeons.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And where, in the day of venesection and flebotomy, the water is more than the food.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And if it is given to some men a kind of wine or medicine with musk, only before venesection or close to it, in order that the main members are comforted and the blood is made thin; and do not take those scratches.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	Make the wounds that are to be made by scraping only those that are placed on the feet, and over the joints of the toes, and the navel, for these members do not suffer from scars; but those that are placed under them.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And do not seek it for those but attract the blood of a member, as if scraping wound on foot in the area of flow of the blood from the member of the leg; and use that which is dissolved fresh blood of the member, as if scraping wound over the belly and navel; because that makes the member thin and scarred and increases the pain because it resolves wound.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And it has been placed on the cheeks when it happens in their operation or poison, because by virtue of attracting the strong leech operation, it removes the poison from its place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And it seems when it is placed on feet and navel with wound-making in those locked up.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	These wounds are administered only with water; and some are also administered with fire.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	Some wounds are administered full of running water in the areas of the navel.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And use water to fill the wound and make it larger, or water in which herbs have been boiled with water that is convenient.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Form of wound-making administered with fire: the width of the orifice should be double what it is that we have formed; and the amount of the solution is more than a palm; and it should be in the middle of it, in the location where it is in the circuit, most of it, the thread should be small according to the amount that enters it a needle.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	It is made from strong wine or orange with large margins, lion, engulfs, and thirds in order that it does not affect the member's own position on it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And it is made with a strong crossbar of iron or wood, where candle is placed on fire.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And it has been this large wound from that which we have mentioned; and the small one less than that, according to the areas and condition of the one who uses it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the wounds of the exhausted and weakened are other than those of young people and large frames.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the quality of placing this wound with fire on the member is that it extends the fire to a piece of wood in advance of a small candle of wax, and places it in the middle of the crossbar in the place where the wound is, so that the fire be lit around the match, so as not to burn the body of the patient.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And it is placed next to the patient's member, and the thread that we have mentioned above it, until when the wounds are made, we do not feel like holding the thread and boiling it on that thread, then the wound is dissolved.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And light the fire according to its way, and repeat it if you do not feel like holding it.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	Make in wound-making that is administered in the area of pain, with water, in which there is no crossbar or thread, and it is not administered except to be filled with water, and placed on the member only.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	This is its form: And this wound, how much it is larger, so much the better, so that it receives a large amount of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Chapter lxii.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Sanguineous wounds are not administered on limbs but on limbs where it is not possible to place wound-makers, because of their age, or those that are similar to them in appearance; or on a naked limb, when it comes to the thread and needles similar to them.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those that you have found are in clean water of the town.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And they are laid out on the day and night in water of the town, before they get hungry, so that it does not affect any cause in the belly of those who have them; and they are emptied out from the body in the beginning of venesection and wound-making; and the member of the patient is frothed up before it gets red; and they are placed on it.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And so they are filled, and case.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if possible water of the place by wound-making, it is better to do so later.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	Then, if not, wash the place with cold water and put in motion water; and be frothed up and squeezed.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if it is prolonged the member of the wound, close up with a cloth in water, and pause it there until the residue is removed.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the wound is multiplied, then sprinkle on it vitriol tri-salted, or frotch with its similar causes of stinging ones, before the wound is cleaned; or they are placed next to the place where the wound is, most of cooked beans, and they are laid out before the beans adhere to the place, and the wound is cleaned.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And where, if necessary, a repetition of wounds when it can be changed, those who have them.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if the wounds of sucking are forbidden to be suspended, then it is frothed up the place with blood or a needle in the places where they come from pain, and they are placed next to those, for those who feel some pain immediately afterwards.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want them to fall down, sprinkle on them a little of salt tri-salted, or salt, or ash, and turn it around immediately.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	So begins the work of the third part: of restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is necessary in the art of medicine; and it is restoration of a fracture or accident of a joint in the bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh, child, know that they boast of this chapter the foolish doctors and those who, at any time, do not consider the free ones of the ancients or read a letter of them.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason the way of life of these scientists in our country is deprived; and I have not been obliged to do any of that at all times well-off from all; and I have not adapted what follows, but only for the length of reading the books of the ancients and study on the understanding of those, before that I extracted the science from them.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	Then I approached experiment and study in the length of my middle life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have already described from this in this chapter all that counts the my science and on which is passed the my experiment; because I have freed it from occupation of elaborating; and I have freed it at the end of elaborating; and I have shown it at the end of declaring; and I have formed it in it ideas forms of the sturments that are administered in it, as it is made by addition of declaring, so too I have done in two preceding chapters.
Capitol primier.	First chapter.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	First chapter: On the essence of fractures of bones, from which it is necessary to make a premise before we begin to commemorate the broken members and the different cases of one or another.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	So consider that I say in the proem of this chapter the summas of the speech; and the chapters at the understanding of which it is necessary to the artisan and in station on the truth of those; so it is you and those that are prompt that knew or learned this noble art before others of you.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And therefore I say that when it happens to a certain fracture or dislocation or twist or ground, then you should cover yourself at the beginning with bloodletting or cauterizing those, or any remedy, if it is not prohibited by any cause, so too it is that you have happened to fall, or are in decrepitude, or is time of violent heat, or of violent cold.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And let it be content in its own food of green herbs and of meats of birds and of crabs; and prohibit meats gross and filling if it is of foods and of all food that fills the veins of blood, unless you are secure of apoplexy cauterization, and if you do not fear effusion of material to the member.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	Then return the hernia to its primary rule by him.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And therefore when the broken bone begins to be restored, then you say that the hernia is being cut by foods of nutriment milk and thick and heavy and heavy in which there is viscosity, so too as it is made from flour cooked with water, and rice, and cabbage, and feet, and bellies of cows, and hens, and fresh drink, and thick and similar to those, and at this rule is made coagulatio of fracture lightly and gently and smoothly.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And you know that the bones of three parts when they are in people who are in their first youth and in those who are in decrepitude, it is not possible for them to be continued and consolidated according to their nature by the desiccation of the members of them.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they are consolidated and continued according to their nature all the time by the desiccation of those members, and they are continued and consolidated those who are of them at the end of leniency, so too that of the bones of small children are made.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	And yet nature adjusts and applies on the broken bone of all beginning any similar cause to glut in which is thickness that adheres and hardens that within it is conglutinating and linking together, until it comes to the end of strength and firmness, so too is fire at the beginning, unless by any cause it does not prohibit those from its works.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason is necessary that you pause the foods of the hernia, foods in which are thickness and viscosity and thickness, so too have we said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	Motation of a variety of fracture according to a variety of the member.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And you know that the varieties of fracture are different according to the variety of the members, as the fracture of the spine bone is different from the fracture of the head bone; and the fracture of the foot bone is different from the fracture of the leg bone; and similarly all the other members are different among themselves.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And I have won at the remembrance of every variety of fracture, separated in its own chapter distinct from the other.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	Motation of a variety of fracture within itself.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And the varieties of bone fractures are different within themselves; because it is made fracture arched another that occurs in the stars; and some are made on the right side as well as on the left, so too those of the neck and ears and additions proceed and do not proceed, as when it is made at the time of pain when prepared to write, and a fracture is made by the plague and disruption of the head, and a small fracture fissure.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And every variety is made or torment proper in the restoration of it according to that comes; and at the remembrance of it distinct in its places.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	Motation of a symbol of fracture of the bone.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And for this is recognized fracture of the bone: it is tortuosity of it, and from that eminence and appearance of it on the feeling, and no of it when you compress that at your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And therefore when it is not in the place of tortuosity that appears nor it is done from this a little touch when you touch the bone with agitation and the hernia does not acquire great pain, then it is not here fracture.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	And then, as it is possible that it is tortuosity or a small fissure, on does not say that you compress it at your hand and with the compression of all; so pause on it of the medicines of which you have remembered approach that moment that conveys to the place; and so be straight by strictness subtil.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And you know that the place when it is arched and does not split into two or any other that does not occur in it satagia, with it is remouded all part of its comparison, then you begin your hour to correct it; and if it occurs on it apoplexy cauterization.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if on it occurs apoplexy cauterization, then leave that for several days within which ceases the apoplexy; and so stuffs that in accordance with each way that you can of levitation and invention.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And you know that the restoration of it and the contraction of it is lighter than the bone on which it occurs satagia.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	Then strengthen that in accordance with that comes the remembrance of it.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	And if in the bone is satagia, then is necessary extension of that broken member of two parts, if it is a hand or a foot; or at your hand if the member is small; or at two ropes or at one rope and at your hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	Then be your position at the which you pause that member loc engual according to its natural figure, while the parts are extended of the broken member, then you perceive that you pass those additions in invent; and according to each way that you can put them in their places.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And protect yourself according to your strength so that it does not occur on the hernia by your operation of them or injury; and according to the right power that you apply one bone to another is in accordance with its various forms.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And then, at that hour advantageously you touch that at your hand; and if sometimes there is any other cause, then correct it and stuff it by the quantity of your strength.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And apply violent extension and compression, so too do foolish movements that occur by the eyes occur to apoplexy cauterization by its operation, or to cause contract in the member so too have we seen it per the operation of those.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	Then apply that which is connected, and apply equal operation and stricture of the member, and rest and quietness; urge on it that not you touch him in the hour of its vigilias and of his sleep, and see its revolution and agitation, and must its excretion, and must all its movements to all its strength; and wait until the position of the member is a position at which he is assured of pain, which cause is because when you feel in the disposition of the position of the member of pain or injury; and then, as you change that to another disposition of those with which you do not feel pain; and guard on it that the position of him those be right and engual, so that no occur tortuosity when it is restored.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of the tightness in the limb is that which I recommend; so that you know that broken limbs are varied in their smallness and their greatness and the shape of those.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And of those that are small also with the hand and the finger and similar to those, then know that the wrapping is of a very thin cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	Might those that are large also with the cushion or mat, then know that in them is wrapped all around and tightly, so that the binding all around connects the large limb and such of all parts with tightness that does not intrude into a spot.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And begin, and your extraction of the fluid, pause carefully over the place of that fracture with three wrappings or four according to the limb deserves; and tighten your hand a little by the binding.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And begin to see again at the upper part of the place of the fracture, and tighten your hand that does not press on the site of the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	And begin to stretch out the wrapping at the place of the fracture a little bit, and soften the tightness little by little, until you take off from that place a large amount.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	And begin to take off another cloth and wrap that covered over the place torn out with the wrapping, and see at the upper part of the place of the fracture; and be your operation in the tightness of the wrapping and in softening of that according as we have said about the first wrapping above.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And pause between the wrappings of leather or cloth according to which is wrapped up the tortuosity of the fracture, if there is any tortuosity; and do not pause for any reason.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And pause over another cloth, and begin to stretch out those wrappings a little bit, if there is no swelling or pus in the place, and then pause over that water which sits the pus of that swelling; and leave it for some days; and then tighten your hand over those.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And make those sticks of cane small enough, and made in a way; or are they of fir wood; or palm branches; and be the width of each stick according to this form and that figure:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, know that the stick that is placed over that fracture is larger and a little smaller than those other sticks, and according to how large or small the limb is; and tighten your second hand about those other sticks according to your first tightness; and begin to stretch out from under that tightness little by little according as we have said about tightness, and it is so that your tightness is according to the site of that fracture; and the more you separate from the fracture, the less is the tightness.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And know that those sticks are medium in size and thin of thread; and if those sticks are large, then so with the rope as you have seen in the operation of some foolish men pausing their hands at those times of strings of leech; and is a great error if one tightens the tightness equally.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And especially thin sticks are not convenient, because you do not obtain by that tightness the water that you want, and know that there is a space between one stick and another of a single finger.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient is laid down by the ends of the sticks according to his tightness in those places, then pause with those of leather or woolen cloth, so that he does not hurt himself.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Some fractures are of the neck, and happen disruption in the larynx, and I come to a recollection about that of the capitol according to its singularity.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And know that a broken limb is not straight with the sticks on the first day; and this is why the limb, when it is large, does not stop to rest on the sticks but waits for three or seven or more days according to your safety about the coming of swelling.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	And this is the way of the embowels who with those the Ancients used to restore, who are placed over a fracture and dislocation and turning.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	A way of embowelling like a sprinkling of the restoration of a fracture, suitable for complex cases and mainly for women and children, because it is not hot upon that which you put: and this is because you take powder of flour, and it is the flour's mediastinian movement in the miller's parts.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And then begin with that as it is, but instead take the egg white and then begin to spread it thinly: and then use that.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another way of applying plaster that heals fractures and dislocations and twists: Take assafetida, myrrh, licorice, aniseed, and mirra, which is made from thousand-year-old salvaged grain, all in the proportion of one dragon; myrrh and aloe in the proportion of five dragons; alochic in the proportion of ten dragons; and all are finely chopped up and mixed with water or milk until it becomes a paste, for if the body of the patient is scarred, use this plaster, as it has a good composition and restores broken bones slightly, and gives life to many men.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another way of applying plaster that heals fractures and twists: Take myrrh and licorice in the proportion of ten dragons; mirra and aloe in the proportion of five dragons; acacia in the proportion of six dragons, and bal armenic in the proportion of twelve dragons.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All are thinned in mortar to make a paste, and spread thinly on water or egg white, and then given it.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	A way of embowelling to separate the joints and bones from their sites, and to ease pain in those and in fractures and breaks: take wool thread and immerse it in vinegar and oil of cayenne and then place it over the site.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	May not be this embowelling's virtue of restoration, of swelling and expelling pain directly.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another way of embowelling to restore broken bones: take sheets of fig leaf and sheets of poppy seed; bind all together and then make the embowelling.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida .i.; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	A way of embowelling that is newly invented to restore the fracture of bones and when you want relief from swelling: take powder of elder, of chamomile and violet flowers, of erica flour, all of it. i. 266-270 All are thinned and spread thinly on the vinegar, if the limb is not scalded. 271-275
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	And if it is scalded, then begin with that immersed in the vinegar or water and then use it. 276-280
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another way of embowelling that is stronger in remedy than the first, when swelling occurs and you need relief: take elder powder and sage, fennel seed, marjoram, violet flowers, chamomile, all of it. All are thinned and spread thinly on spring water or on warm water, all according to the quality of the limb and rest for the color of that water.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	And Ioprocras does not tear in the five livres that are placed over the broken limb to restore it, except wax and oil, and for no other reason; and I recommend that it be varied between thinness and thinness. 286-290
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	May the plant called galaha be placed on the damaged member to restore it and the causes that produce it, such as cold, dry quality, which has been described by others in relation to those causes that we have mentioned.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	A paste that can be used for injury and pain: take a little meat, chopped from the back of a horse or cow, and from the skin, and salt, finely cut up; dry them out, and make a paste.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	The quantity should be adjusted according to how much the joint swells and how quickly it heals; consider whether there is any pain or if the bone has been broken, then you will not need to move it from its place; otherwise, do so with care every day.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if there is severe pain or swelling at the site or if it becomes hot, then you will cover or move it away from its place in that moment, and apply the paste to it.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	And take a cloth and a sea sponge, wet it with tepid water, submerge it in the water, and then wash the site thoroughly until the swelling and pain subside; then let the member rest for an hour; then put a woolen cloth soaked in vinegar or rosewater on it, and bandage it over; let it rest for another hour until you are sure that there is no fever, and that the inflammation of the member has subsided, and the pain has abated.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then repeat this process gently and repeatedly until the area becomes less tender, applying the paste lightly at first and then more firmly as it heals.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if all the fever, pain, swelling, and other symptoms have completely subsided and you no longer need paste or constriction, then you may stop using them; once healed, there is no need for further treatment.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o .vii.; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if the member does not present any of those causes that we have mentioned, then do not move it from its place for at least three days or four or five or six; and some leave it alone for ten days according to what you see by the swelling of the member, as we have said, until the fracture has healed, and if there is no pain when moved, then let it rest on the formation of new tissue over it.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	Then adjust the constriction more than in your first constriction, and adjust the thickness of the paste according to how much the patient has been given to eat.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	And if you see that the site of the fracture has dried up and become very thin, then know that the nutrition is being prevented from reaching it; and therefore submerge it in tepid water completely, and let it be submerged for three days; and relieve the constriction slightly, and by this operation allow food to reach the member, and heal slowly.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	And that water can also restore the damaged member completely when not restored at first, according to what is necessary, and restore it according to its tortuosity, which is an error in their operation, and great fear; and if it was done in error, then let it grow larger on both sides while being moved around.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And I have not seen any of them use water to treat this, so it is reasonable for you not to do so.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	For a head fracture:
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	Fractures can be either of three types: a complete fracture, in which the bone is broken into two pieces and separated from each other; an incomplete fracture, in which the bone is split but still connected at one end; or a compression fracture, in which the bone is crushed or compressed. In the first type, the break is caused by a hit or blow from a hard object; in the second type, it is caused by twisting or bending the joint beyond its normal limits; and in the third type, pressure is applied to the bone until it breaks.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	The pain of these two types of fractures is either great or slight, and the cause of both is impact with a hard object or from falling on a rock, and their similarities are as follows.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	This fracture is either penetrating, which enters the skin and leaves it, or in the face of the bone, and the pain of these two types of fractures can be either great or slight.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	A fracture that is being formed inside the bone, in the subtle hair-like part of it, and by which this type of fracture is called the capillary fracture.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	It is a fracture caused by impact with a hard object or from falling on a rock, and its similarities are as follows; one piece of the bone enters another, and it breaks in the hollow part of it, just like how the pieces break when you hit them with a hard object or fall on a rock. This type of fracture is called an impact fracture.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	It usually breaks in the bones of humans and animals, especially in the upper part of the body.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	These are all types of fractures that can heal on their own, provided they do not cause any serious problems.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And I will return to you with the remembrance of all this.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	I know all these types of fractures through experience and by asking about them, and I have learned that the presence of rotten or decomposing flesh on the outside of bones can indicate the type of fracture present.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	The capillary type is recognized by the appearance of bleeding on the bone and by the presence of pus; it is often found on the surface of the bone, and the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	In the treatment of fractures, consider at first the patient's symptoms and, if there is a clear indication of danger or an urgent situation, such as vomiting blood, fainting, loss of consciousness, fever, or pain in the joints, then it should be treated immediately; otherwise, wait for a day or two to see if the symptoms improve on their own.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if you do not have any urgent symptoms that require immediate treatment, then begin the patient' care.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	This is because if you have come into contact with the patient and then find that they are infected and it is wintertime, then know that you should wait until day thirteen according to all the arrangements.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is in the summer, then know that you should wait until day seven to check on the bone; if it has been left without skin and there is pus, and if there are any of the symptoms we have mentioned, then treat them immediately.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already reached the skin and is separated completely or crushed together, then know that you should remove the broken parts according to what I have recommended; this will provide relief for the patient.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	This is because you should examine the patient' head carefully and discover any injury on the bone according to what is usual or by looking at its shape; it should be treated lightly for the patient.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if there is a fracture in the bone, then stop any movement of it by applying cold compresses or poultices to it, and let it rest; this will help reduce fever and swelling. Then begin treating the area around the bone and removing the skin from it.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	This is done in one of two ways.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the first way is to cut the bone with straight knives, and this is how it is done: You use one knife to make an incision in the bone, a little narrower than the other; then you use another knife, a little wider than the first, to widen the incision. And this is how it is done.
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And then you administer a slightly wider knife than the second one.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And since the various types of incisers have different names, some are thicker than others; and some are shorter than others, and are made of iron or steel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use their ease in striking the incisers so that you don't cut your finger or hand.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is strong and hard, then you should strike it from behind rather than in front, since sharp knives are called for.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And they are not called this way unless the bone's edge on the test is cut off, because of its rounded shape near it; so that the cap stays joined to the bone's circular edge, which does not allow it to be submerged or go beyond the bone's thickness.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	And it is necessary for you to take many of these knives, each suited to the thickness of each bone, since in all cases where the edge of the test is sharp, its length and brevity should be according to the quantity of that test' thinness.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	This is the form of three types of knives: The quality of piercing into the broken bone is that you place the knife on the bone and turn it around so that you know that the bone has already been penetrated; and then move it to another location, and pause it where there is a quantity of the thickness of the edge or radius thereof.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And then you cut with the incisers where there is a space in the bone, and make it small that you can pass over it in the end of levitation; as we have said, so that you remove the bone or to your hand, or for some other reason using any tools that you will prepare for water, as tongs and forceps are subtle.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And since you keep all carefulness so that the inciser does not touch any part of the skin.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And then when you have completed perforating the bone, and separate it from the skin if it continues to run; and then extract it, since you can cut and close it with a sharp object similar to an inciser, but more large and more subtle than the others.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if any part of the small bones is broken and twisted, then you take it with ease from water that you should get from the tools; and then put it in a solution of vinegar and wet the scales we have mentioned.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And another way of operation is lighter, far from pain, which is called the speech of Launce; and this is its meaning: it is necessary for you to start by uncovering the part of the bone at the place where the fracture is most violent and most evident, until when you have uncovered that part and have paused there the tip of this inciser slowly and gently, whose form is like this:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And it is that the lenticular break is sharp and does not incise any cause, and that the acute break is in two places at a distance from each other in length, as if times; so that the lenticular break fits to the skin with the sharp face of the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And then you strike the inciser on one side of a small heel as long as you want to cut all the bone easily in this way when it is turned over, and be sure that such an accident does not happen which you fear in any way, and if the medicine was the most common among all people and the most ignorant of them; certainly, and if it were sleeping.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	And if the medicine has attached itself to any part of the bone at the place where the accident happens in some places, it incises it with the tip of the inciser that is lenticular, and releases it easily from water, because it is released from water's danger and its pain.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the bone's fracture does not penetrate within the skin, and what is cut off or remains on the bone is its edge, and it has sharp and subtle sides; then you cut that edge and remove those sides with very sharp objects of different sizes, so that they can be administered in any place where they are most convenient to you and the most right for them according to the shape of your operation on this broken bone and its figure.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And since you administer in your hand with the greatest sharp part of those objects, and then use the most subtle one; and do not stop until you have reached a place where you can administer the largest and most subtle object among them all.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	But in any of the other small hairline fractures and subtle breaks, you administer according to what happens during your correction.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And this is the cause that has not been studied in all those arts.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	He shown you in great fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the skin is square when you remove the bone, then you take a piece of cloth according to the quantity of the wound, and dip it in rose water, and put it on the orifice of the wound; and then you take another piece of cloth that is folded or triple and dip it in cold water, and put it on the first cloth; and do not tighten that cloth but only as much as the wound needs. And then you administer very gently to it, and do not press it except by the quantity of the wound.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And leave it with this cure for a day or two until you are sure there is an abscess; and then remove that wound and administer medicines which are superfluous to dry up; such as flour of iron and flour of alum, and dust of endivia and aristology, and similar to them.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And this is because you should make a powder of these medicines and sprinkle it on the wound, as if it were dry; and generally speaking, administer in that all medicine whose property is to stop bleeding and not to bite it.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And keep your wound clean in your cure; and it should not be in a mask of balm or anything else; and do not add virulence to it; because when it is placed on the skin of the brain, it corrupts it and spoils it, and happens to the patient's bad luck.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And it happens to the skin of the head, which is when the bone is broken and most cured by your cure, and it is blacker in its surface; then consider at that moment if you happen to the patient' bad things that we have said, you know that it is dangerous no matter what.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas .iii., e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not happen to be black from the medicine that is applied on it, and if this medicine makes it black, then you take a part of honey and another part of rose water. iii. and over those lines put a cloth, and then put that wound on the skin; and then cure it with the different types of medicine that suit it to be healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter 3.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	The Restoration of a Broken Nose.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	You know that the nose is not broken from two little bones that are separate, or one of those small bones that are cartilaginous; and it is not broken and does not happen to it except for its shape being twisted and tortuous and narrow.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	But if one of the two little bones is broken, then you must put your small finger in the nose and fix that little bone to the other little bone with a tiny splint; and push the nose forward and back so that it returns to its natural shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	Do this for you easily, and be sure not to damage your operation on the patient' nose.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and does not reach that one, then cover it with a piece of flesh so that it is equal to the end of the bone where there is little thickness.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in two parts, then make it look like this.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	Then wrap him in a blanket for the first day of the fracture if possible; otherwise, then do so on the seventh day or until the swelling subsides.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	Then insert a piece of cloth into the end of the nose if the fracture is in one part, or two pieces if the fracture is in two parts, and make it as thick as the width of the nose's bridge.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And say to the old restorative that the cloths should be changed every day, but I have not seen it; provided that the cloth is wrapped in sheep's album mixed with powder; and then let it lie until the bone is healed and the cartilage硬ened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And some are inserted into the nose instead of cloth, unless they are wrapped in leather; and it is that the patient already has a severe fracture of the nose and is not prohibited from breathing.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	And this cause is not necessary for you; and if you want, make it with cloth, and if you want, make it with cloths.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if another fracture occurs, wrap the nose in a piece of wax or resin mixed with rose oil, or with diabetes.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	But if that does not happen, then wrap it with flour of sesame and powdered egg yolk mixed with sheep' s album; and place a leather strip over it, and do not wrap the nose with anything.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	But if the bones of the nose are fractured or dislocated, then cut those off and remove them with instruments that suit them; and then sew up the wound, and treat it with water that hardens and consolidates it, and with cloth that suits it.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	And if plague occurs inside the nose, then treat it with cloths and administer plasters of lead so that it is completely cured.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter III.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	Of the restoration of the jaw when it is dislocated.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jaw has been broken and the fracture is not a plague, then consider if it is only a little bit forward, and is not dislocated on both sides; then its knowledge is limited.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	And so, if the fracture is on the right side, then introduce the left index finger into the mouth of the patient; and resemblingly, if the fracture is on the left side, then introduce the right index finger; and push easily the little bit forward, with a little bit of force, to the end of the fracture inside, with ease at the outside part forward; and with that, properly equalize the two sides.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the jaw fracture is separated into two parts, then administer extension of two parts according to their direction until it is possible to make them equal.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if a disturbance of the teeth occurs, then strengthen those that you hope will endure with a wire of gold, silver, or ivory; and then place it on the dislocated jaw with cerate, and place it on a double cloth, and place it on a large star properly cut out, or a single ring at its length; and then bind it tightly so that it does not break.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And command the patient to rest and be calm, and suspend his food from sour milk.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you think that the shape has already changed in some way, then wrap him and leave it for three days; and then correct it which has already been changed and wrap it with flour of sesame, or sheep' s album, or flour of rice, because you will have taken away the cerate from it, and place a leather strip over it.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And when that is properly attached and adjusted to the wrap, and the disposition of the bone is not altered, leave it alone until it is healed and strengthened the fracture; for these fractures heal in three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if another fracture occurs, then administer water which has been boiled and cooled down, until it is certain that it is healed; and then remove the plaster from it.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is a plague, then consider if it is big or small; then you should cut those off with water that hardens and consolidates it, and treat it with cloth that suits it.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the orifice of the plague is small, then enlarge it with a needle according to your need.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And when you have left those off, and of those there is no need to remove them again, then sew up the orifice of the plague if it is wide; and otherwise, leave it with the cloth that covers it, until it is healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter V.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	Of the restoration of the fork when it is dislocated.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	It is broken in one of three ways. First, the bone may be fractured at its end and dislocated from the joint. Second, it may be dislocated from the joint without a fracture. Third, there may be no dislocation or fracture, but the bone will have been moved out of its proper position.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	Whether it is broken, separated, or separated into two parts, without causing a dislocation; then its restoration is easy; or whether it has been caused by a dislocation; then its restoration is difficult; or whether it has been caused by a plague.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And the operation in this case, when the fracture is a plague, is that you should prepare two assistants; so that one holds the aide and the other extends the fork to the dislocated part.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	And then swallow the fracture with the fingers within that it is made according to its shape; and not in a small eminence or hollow.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if you are uncomfortable with the extension of the hand, then pause the tingling of the patient' s hand or finger, and make it the size according to your need; and extend and lift up the fork and wrap the splay around it so that you swallow the fracture according to its shape.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot throw the end of the fork to the outside parts, because it is a problem with the tongue; then the patient should lie on his back, and place a pointed cauterization instrument half an inch long in the mouth, over the muscle; and pause that.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And then the assistant presses the muscle to the dislocated part within that the bone of the fork is raised where it is in the mouth; and then correct the fracture and swallow it with the fingers.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	But if you feel pain in the fork or it is too big, then cut those off with ease.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is stuck in the bone, then use one of the tools that you have prepared for water to cut those off easily. For this tool, you should use a saw or iron from which this has been made:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And it is similar to any of those which you have prepared for water; and that this is the shape of it according to its right side or left side: And let it be the size according to the water that you need for it, according to the size of the bone or the length of it.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	May the length of him be according to what is possible for the operation; that there be two extremities also with times, and the one extremity be wide and the other narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the disruption of the pus that you have carved out when you extracted the bone is wide, and certain of infection, then you should adjust the two lips of the pus to suture them.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the disruption is little, or you fear infection, then you should use the blade and powder according to the quantity of the opening of the pus.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if infection occurs, then pour vinegar and rose oil and place it on that.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	May the opening of the bone be according to the section that has been made, and may its length be like a palm in width, and its distance from one side to the other be like half a palm; then you should wrap the skin with a thin cloth; then you should wrap this cloth around the fracture; then you should add two drops of oil of rose onto it; then you should cover that with a thin cloth; then you should rub it with a hand, and if it feels hot, you should stop rubbing, and if it does not feel hot, you should continue rubbing until it becomes numb.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And if not, then you will have opened the bone; and so that you may see the hernia each day, and when the ligament is softened or you notice that the stela has already healed, then you should adjust it and strengthen the bandage.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And you should place the hernia's sleep on the neck of the patient, and leave it there with a small cushion; so that by doing so, the helper raises the patient's chest, and thus the fracture of the clavicle is raised along with the muscle; or the arms are raised to the neck.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not adjust the ligament unless there is an immediate infection or pus in the area within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	Then change the poultice if you see the face of it wet, and adjust the tightness and restore that, and leave it until it is restored and the fracture of the clavicle has hardened.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And then strengthen and support it according to the month in twenty-eight days, and in some cases in certain men it is done within a period of time from that day.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	Of the Restoration of the Fracture of the Shoulder.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The tarte is broken in the patient's left shoulder, and not broken on him but on the sides.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And when the left shoulder is broken—and it is broken in the right place of the shoulder—it is not recognized unless it is touched, then according to the figure of the fracture and the shape of the bone, you should prepare him and reduce that according to the natural figure in all ways possible to prevent it from being difficult.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	Then you should pour powder of wheat flour and olive oil onto that spot; then you should place a double cloth on it; then you should place a thin cloth on the stela, which is placed on a small table according to the quantity of the spatula or less.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	Then if the stela is concave in some places of the spatula, then you should fill that with olive oil; and place the stela according to equality.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	Then you should wrap it tightly with a cloth of linen, taking care that it does not become tight; and place the stela in its place until it has healed.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And you should consider the ligament each day; and if it is softened, then adjust it again and equalize the stela if it has healed from its place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And avoid covering the hernia with a cloth.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	And the tarte is restored in twenty days or 25.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	Then when this number is completed, then you should dissolve the ligament, and that you know with certainty because it belongs to the bones of which the beginning is not painful and the dissolution is also not painful.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you press on the broken bone and leave it there without a bandage, then you should cut it from one side to the other, and do what we have said in the fracture of the clavicle for gout by chance if this occurs here.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	Of the Restoration of the Fracture of the Foot.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The foot is sometimes broken in its middle part and the tarte is also broken there, more than half of it, or completely broken into pieces and crushed.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And from the accidents of the foot when it is broken in its middle part, that is a fall inside and causes great pain, difficulty in walking, a loud noise, and vomiting; and it is declared in the cavity of the broken bone and is not hidden from the feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And the restoration of it is that the hernia be raised on its two sides, and a cushion placed between the legs; then you should press the muscles of it, and adjust the ribs to the two sides, and take care in the operation of it and in the equality according to all possible ways so that it may return to its figure, as far as possible.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	Then you should place the poultice and plaster over it, and open the stela of a small table, made of cypress or ash; because you have wrapped that in a cloth; then you should adjust that without making it tight; and then consider the bandage every hour, and when it becomes soft, strengthen it.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	And if necessity forces you to destroy that poultice or its corrosion, or pain, or pus that occurs in the area, then you should cut and remove that, and purify it with a solution according to the method of curing it; then change the poultice, if necessary, by water, and adjust the tightness, until it is healed.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	Of the Restoration of Ribs When They Are Broken.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	You should know that the fracture of ribs occurs only in its wide ends, which are connected to the two sides; and from the edges of them do not occur to those cracks unless they are made of cartilage.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And the knowledge of it is not hidden from the feeling, you should inquire about that.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration be like this that it adjusts the fracture according to all possible ways, as far as it is able; and then poultice and strengthen the broken bone with a stela, if you feel pain from that.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And if the fracture of the ribs is declining inside and it causes great pain and pricking, so that it occurs when you have wept, and because the bone has become wet with a cloth; and it causes difficulty in swallowing, coughing, and vomiting from a loud noise; this is a difficult cure.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And so the Antibodies are being formed in that with great energy.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And of those it is said that when you stop eating the hernia which causes inflammation and a loud noise, so that the abdomen becomes swollen and extended, and the fracture is driven outward.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	May it not cause a light injury to generate pus by chance if it occurs; and if it has already happened, then help is on the way.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And they say of them that it is stopped from being swollen and let it flow strongly; and it seems to be a reasoning, but nevertheless, it is feared that the swelling will throw away the excess to the place by weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	And they said to him: Cover that place with wool that has already been soaked in oil of cautery, and put dust between the ribs until it is filled, so that the wound is closed up when you wrap a second roundness around it; then wash the patient with the cure of pleurisy of food and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if a violent constriction causes the hernia not to tolerate it, and the nerves are punctured by the tension, fear for the patient, then cover that place with a covering of skin, cut off the rib, and then open it up again with an instrument that preserves its shape, which is preceded by a scarification, and which carves the ribs with ease, and removes it.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	Then let them adjust the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a suture, and heal it with plasters inside until it is healed.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if pus comes out inside, then let them wrap and dust with rosin oil and place it on the wound, and let it be cured by the water that covers the pus inside.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	It is to be raised up on a bed where he sleeps until it is healed.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter 9.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	Of the restoration of fracture of the spine of the two and of the collar.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Some have broken their bones of the neck, and their атрицию, and similar to the vertebrae of the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And if water comes out of one and you want to know if it will heal or not, consider, for sometimes their muscles are already softened and stuporized and dead and cannot be extended or strengthened those and when you squeeze them with a needle or they feel pain in them, then you know that it will not heal and in the same dispositions it is fatal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if they feel pain in them when you squeeze and prick them, then you know that the bone of the neck is saved and the hernia is healed by cure.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you see the vertebrae of the neck similar to water and want to know if it will heal or not, consider the feet of him.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	If you think they are already softened, water comes out that happens to the most, and when you stand on their back, there is a wind and an urge to urinate, and some become raised up on their back and cannot hold it, then you know that it is fatal, and do not continue to work for his cure.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	Maybe if there is no cause of those, the cause is better and lighter.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	The cure of him is that you pierce into the sedation of the pus and put oil of rosin on the spine that has been cut, or with a cotton wool ball; place it over that one in some places so that it is sedated the pus.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	Then place a comfortable and existing plaster on it, and tighten it with a thread; order the patient to rest and be calm, and not sleep on the back where he hurts until it is healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if the neck of the bone is broken or there is some cause that has already been separated from it, then let it be dried up on a cloth and make it stand up; and adjust the two lips of the wound with a suture if it is large, and heal it with plasters inside until it is healed.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	Maybe if the back of the bones is broken and it is the end of the fracture, then let them enter with the left hand into the hole in the back, and join the broken bone to the other with what is possible according to ease; and then place a plaster and wrap it up tightly, if you want those, and then tighten it.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel broken necks behind him, then let them stand on that one, and tighten it; and heal the wound with the cure that is preceded until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De restauracio de la ancha.	Of the restoration of the broken nose.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the nose are to be broken and if they are broken, then the fracture of them is not but a communication in their ends and is spread out in their length and declines in the halves inside; and pain comes to the patient at the place and pricks, and the chest is stuporized when the fracture occurs.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	The restoration of him is that you extend your hand over it until it is above the fracture which is the shape of him.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	And if the fracture is only at the end of him, then you swallow that one with what is convenient for you by way of engagement within that it is assembled to its natural figure.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	Maybe if the fracture is in the long or already declines in the halves of him, then you prepare the patient's belly for your restoration of that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And then when you have joined him, place a plaster on it, and tighten it tightly so that you do not fear pricking of the fracture or moving of the stelha.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And swallow the concave shape with water that it fills him within that he takes the strictness according to equality, and order the patient to sleep on his back or open his side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	Maybe if there is pus coming out, then you stop its spread and heal the patient from within until the pus is sedated, and place water over it according to what comes before; and then return to the restoration of him, and tighten it like this with a thread.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if there are broken or separated bones, then you face them.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the neighbor.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	Adjudor is what is between the collar and the top of the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is broken, then the restoration of him is in two ways, which are: the first that you take a piece of fust with half-inch thickness according to this shape:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And let them be tied in two ends with a thread, and let it be suspended from the elevated place.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And follow the patient on a chair; and then cut out the broken arm over the fust until it reaches the tip of him in the middle place where it is joined to the curvature of the fust.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And then hang up on that one any difficult cause, or the doctor extend it to the halves of him; and then let him take medicine that the fracture join with their ends, until the fracture returns according to what it is.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And the other way is that the patient be raised up on his neck and his hand be hung up with a thread; and let one of the ministers hold water that is opened up the fracture with their ends, and another holds pus from him; and each one of them extends to the half of him.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want the spread to be faster, then you tighten it on the fracture with a thread and on that one with another, and each of the ministers extends his two halves.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And if the fracture is close to the end of the muscle, then let it be stopped at the middle of the thread on the chair and on the other side of the fracture where it should join the collar.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And if the fracture is similar to the collar, then let it be stopped at that place and on the collar itself.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	And swallow it with ease and do the work, and then when you have joined him according to what is necessary and is applied by good application, then tighten it if there is no pus coming out.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	May it happen that an embolism is removed early, then the constriction will be left for seven days and covered with a woven cloth impregnated with oil of roses until the embolism is removed, and then tighten it.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	And the way to tighten it is that you put plaster on the fracture and then cover the plaster with a drape; and then adjust the arm over that support, and place your hand over their muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	Then remove the drape and tighten the arm over the support so that the arm is in its place of support, unless there is a prohibition for this by any cause of the broken bone.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And then use them.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And that you put the plaster so that it is thick on one side and thin on the other; and place between each plaster the distance of a finger, and make the length of the plasters according to the fracture by adding three fingers from the whole break.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	Then tighten the plasters at the constriction which was mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And that your constriction on the place of the fracture is tighter.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And when the fracture has healed a little, then make the constriction looser.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And so if you change the position of the plasters and the constriction is still like that which we have said at the hour when you restore the limb to its position, then do it.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear an embolism, then you leave the constriction and the plasters in place for seven days as we have said above.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	Then consider the limb in all its parts for three days so that nothing happens at the place of protusion or inflation; or is it prohibited for any food to reach the limb by means of a superfluity of constriction; and then correct everything according to what we have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	May it be that you are certain that no cause of this will happen, then do not remove the ligature before three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And let them sleep on their back, and their feet are on the ground, and their hands are on their chest.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	Then place a full cocoon of wool on the support, and consider for an hour from nightfall or from daybreak whether the shape of the broken limb has not changed or whether it is soft, and then correct it according to your power.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	Then provide food for the patient according to the order we have given above, in such a way that the food is not strong at first, but then cover it so that the food becomes thicker.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	And the custom of support and leg wrap is that they are tightened in ten days; and then cover them so that they are removed and given a bath, and have medicine applied to them which corrects it.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is painful, then do not remove the plaster and plasters in place for a day or for two months.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter 12.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	Of Restoration of Broken Limb.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The arm is composed of two bones which are called two forks; one is small, and that is the one which speaks soft, and the other is large, and that is the one which is placed from below the small one from the start, from its upper end.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And a strong blow breaks only the large fork, or the small one, and their joints are strong together.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when the small fork is broken above, then the restoration of it is lighter, and its healing is faster.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when the small fork is broken below the fracture, the healing of it is bad, and its recovery is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And worse than that is when two bones are broken together.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Then if the broken bone is the small fork above, then it is convenient to the doctor, in order to restore it, that he pause a little extension with ease before him before he is wrapped.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	May it be that the large fork is broken, then consider that he pause a little extension with force.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both forks are broken together, then consider that you pause the extension more forcefully.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	Then consider that you pause the shape of the hand before the restoration of it and the extension of it on a cushion, and the palm of the hand is over the parts above, more than all the others, and the ear be lower than all the others, and the foot be flat on the ground.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	Then a cushion before him in height or above it, so that the patient does not work for himself.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	And then the minister extends the arm from below by the hand or limb, and another minister extends above it with his hand, and a third one on either side.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	Then the doctor wraps the bone up to the best shape he can get.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if the fracture of the bone is not severe, then do not cut it open all the way, but correct it with your power.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if the fracture of the bone is separated more than you expected in the restoration of it, then do not force it, but return to what we have said above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	May it be that the fracture is severe, I have already written a special chapter on this, and then take the treatment of that.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if an embolism happens at the beginning of your restoration, then you make a cloth to cover it with oil of roses and white wax, and make it thin between transparency and subtlety, and tighten the cloth on it gently before the embolism passes; and then remove the cloth and make plaster prepared from powder of moly mixed with chalk of huou, and then make the steles; and let that stela be placed over that fracture more thickly and strongly.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	You know that the name of the steles for the arm is six, or that the fracture is in one fork or both forks together.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	Then tighten your constriction over the place of the fracture more firmly and forcefully, and when the extension goes from the start of the fracture or lower down on it, then tighten the constriction a little less according to what happens before you remember the arm in the beginning of this chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the cloths that are wrapped over the fracture are soft and wet cloths, not hard or rough, and the cloth which is tightened on it is made of the same material as before, as we have said above.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	Then consider the limb with plaster for a period of seven days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if there is any cause of this constriction which requires correction, and then consider that you put the limb in water at its tail before it stops.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	Then release the limb from restraint before stopping, and then tighten your constriction.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the constriction is already softened and the bone is already healing and looking like it, then correct everything according to your power.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And then consider if any food is prohibited from reaching the limb by means of a superfluity of constriction, because it softens that a little and releases it for several days before eating it, and then tighten it.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	May it be that there is no cause for this which we have said, then do not consider that it is removed within ten days or less than that.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	Then the hand of the patient should be suspended from its power of movement by a harness, and let him sleep on his back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	You know that this fracture is restored in 30 or 32 days, and very strong is the restoration in 28 days, and all of this is according to the dispositions of the complexions and the dispositions of power.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	Of the restoration of a fracture of the ankle joint and of those mentioned.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	Do you know that when the foot has a fracture and the toes are twisted, it is not caused by an external blow but rather by internal movement.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when fracture or dislocation occurs in the foot, let the patient lie on their back and extend their leg, keeping it still.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	Then the doctor should extend the broken bones and apply a poultice to those inside that are badly crushed.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And when you have applied plaster and poultice, if there is no swelling, then bandage it well; and you have wrapped that in a cloth.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	Or if the cut is on the inside of the foot, it should be treated with a long bandage, and the patient should be instructed to tighten it with their hand; and it should be wrapped well.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	Then attach the plaster to the cloth that is under it, so that the plaster is applied to the foot; and tighten it well.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	Or if the fracture is on the outside of the foot, let it be placed face down on a cloth, so that the foot is raised and turned towards the inside; and tighten it well, so that the patient's hand rests between their thighs with their fingers intertwined.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	And if there is a fracture in the toes of the foot, let it be treated with poultice as described above; and if it is the little toe, then tighten it well and if you wish, attach a small splint to make it easier for the patient to walk.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	Or if there is a fracture in the other toes (the middle toe, the index toe, the auricular toe, or the anel toe), let it be treated as described above for the little toe; or all of them together, which is better; or attach a small splint to one of them, as we have said for the little toe.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider, in your restoration, and wrap it up, the application of cold poultice and opposition - according to the same operation - to those mentioned above, according to the repetition of his narration.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter XIV.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	Of the Restoration of a Fracture of the Pelvis Bone.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The pelvic bone has a fracture and it is evident according to the turning of the foot towards the outside and the top of the pelvis.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	The restoration of it is made in such a way that the foot is supported on the fracture and another bandage is applied to the top of it, and the patient lies on their back with their abdomen exposed.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	Then the doctor should extend the whole bandage according to its quality, when the fracture is in the middle part of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	Or if it is in the lower part of the pelvis, then let the bandage be extended to the top of the leg, so that the extension goes over it, and another bandage should be applied to the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And if the fracture is in the lower part of the pelvis, then let the bandage be extended to the top, and the extension should go over it; and if it is in the middle part, then the bandage should be placed on both sides.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	Then the doctor should join the bones by their natural shape and the joint should be well-joined; then apply plaster and tightness to the member, if there is no swelling.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	Or if it is in the swelling, then you should rest for a few days until the swelling goes down, and then return to your cure.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The tightness of it should be made in such a way: wrap a hard bandage over the fracture, double it two or three times, and smooth it out; then wrap the back, so that it reaches to the tail and the pelvis.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	Then attach a long cord between the pelvis and the back near the hip, and bring the ends of the cord to the top of the leg on both sides, and then wrap it around the back and pelvis, so that the cord reaches from the tail to the hip; and then make it smooth.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	Then place a splint over the pelvis in the location of the fracture, and place another splint on the back.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	Then fill in the space between the back and the pelvis with soft cloth, so that the tightness is secured.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	Then begin with a strong tightness of the middle one at the site of the fracture with three or four layers, and if there is no problem with the member, your tightness should be less and more moderate and more soft.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	Then extend the two ends of the cord to the top of the leg, and tighten them separately, making sure that the bandage does not come off its place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	Then leave the tightness on it, unless there is some problem with the member as mentioned above; and if any cause occurs, then deal with it according to the above-mentioned instructions, and correct whatever has happened, according to what we have said about fractures in the toes.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	Or if the pelvis is thick, then wrap it as described above; and if not, turn it upside down and treat it with a solution that softens it, and then make it well with that which heals it.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	In some cases, this fracture of the pelvis is strengthened by other bones that are adjusted to it, as we have said about assistance and legs.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	However, in the restoration of it, do not cause a limp in the leg; and if it is restored alone, then apply another splint to it, so that it may walk again.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And know that the pelvis is strengthened after one month or a little more or less, and all of this depends on the complexity and other factors.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	Of the Restoration of a Fracture of the Ankle Bone of the Foot.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	Know that the fracture of the ankle is severe and does not cause pain in the foot; and if it is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	Or if it is a fracture, then there is only a crack or twist in the joint; and this is caused by an external blow, which is called a "plague" or "sickness", and all of it is treated as described above.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	The restoration of it is made in such a way that the foot is joined together, and the joint is repaired according to what is possible by means of ease and simplicity and construction.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	Then apply plaster and place it on a round splint, if you wish; and tighten it well to the foot.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	Then consider all the instructions that we have given for other fractures, as if it is not caused by cold, then avoid all causes of those, and treat it according to what is mentioned above; and if there are any accidents, deal with them in such a way that they do not cause pain to the patient.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	Of the Restoration of a Fracture of the Back.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	Know that in the back there are two bones, one of which is large and is called the spine; and the other is small and is called the hipbone.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	It occurs in all parts of the body; and when it is a fracture of both arms, then the restoration of them is as described above for the restoration of one arm; and the operation on them is the same.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if we break two bones together, the back becomes all bent.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if one breaks the lower back bone, the back becomes all bent from before.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if one breaks the upper back bone, it hurts much, and it is of those causes that you are not accustomed to.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	Then administer an extension and a compression and a ligation of the arteries according to that engagement.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	However, let him also consider if the fracture of the back is not serious and there are no sagittal fractures, that extension should be milder and less painful, and it will please you with its virtue.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And in the back is some cause of surgery on the ribs, and it is when you engage the stars and that you complete all the entire operation, then you will take pieces of a whip from the palm tree where they are placed for causes that are placed in solies, and they are only made of small size, and are not thick with the hands, and are long according to the length of the back, and from the lower part up to the ribcage.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	Then wrap each drape in two envelops according to its length, and place one over the lower back bone of one side and the other over that of the other side, and they are from the bottom within the ribcage.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	Then place the two stars in three places of the two extremities and at the middle, for with this stretching the back is forbidden to bend towards the right or left side, and it is in a good position.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And one whip has already been administered according to the length of the back, and it is placed on it so that it maintains its movement.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And mainly consider that you do not break something in fracture, and when there is a proper plague.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Then consider the back every day and study it well for later study, and you guard it from apoplexy and inflammation or other similar causes; and if any of these causes occur, then prevent it with water that heals within.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	On the Fracture of the Trunk and Bones of the Chest and the Treatments Thereof.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	In the trunk, there does not occur a fracture altogether; however, in the bones of the chest, there occurs a fracture of some ribs; and in the ditz (ribs), there occurs a fracture little, and it does not occur to them except at the ends in the middle of the disposition.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if the bones of the chest have a fracture and those bones are raised above each other, then place the patient on their back on the ground prepared in this way while continuing.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	Then place one foot on top of the raised bones, and press them together, and engage them within so that they return to their places.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	Then place plaster and stop it above, and pause the stomach of the chest on a small table where there are two flat surfaces.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	Then strengthen that with a stretching downward of the chest, since you have wrapped it in drapes and with other causes from which it suffers.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And when three or four days have passed, then you will remove the plaster, since you will see the engaged bones, or if they are broken or displaced, and the operation in those is done with ease.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	However, if any of the ribs are broken, then restore them, and engage them in this way with the eye and recommit them to you in the engagement of the ribs from the hand.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	Then place the broken star according to its length, and it is a little on the side of it; then leave the foot on the table that you have been instructed in, and strengthen it with a stretching downward.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	However, if the broken bones are of the ribs, two or three or more, then you will place each rib star according to its quantity wrapped in a drape lion, and strengthen the table at the bottom of the foot, and let it stand on one of the surfaces of the table so that the stomach of the chest holds it in good retention.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is convenient to you that you do not forget that you consider all the causes that I have told you in the other fractures of the accidents that we have said; and prevent any accident with water.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVII.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	On the Fracture of the Skull of the Female and the Hip bone and the Hand of the Male.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the skull of the female is broken, then make it a cutting in two parts, and incline it on one side a little, and let it be held behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	Then the matron will wrap the skull with a cloth, and it is done in the skull of him with care; then the female will be struck, and she will lift up the two parts little by little, since all this is outside the back of the skull so that it returns to its place with care and the broken bone returns.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	Then place powder on the two parts, and when he wants to urinate, remove it with ease and urinate, and reduce it and return it according to the way in which you mixed it at first, and then return to his powder first.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	Then do this for seven days or more, since that is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you want, take a bladder of oil and tighten it over the trunk of him with a cannula; then insert all the bladder into the skull of him, and tightly blow into the cannula with virtue so that the bladder is inflated inside the skull, since the fracture returns.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	Then it is filled with cloth and left for a few days according to what we have told, so that it heals.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the hip bone of the male or female is broken, then administer in the restoration and engagement of the water that we have told in the hipbone.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And this water that is right does not occur in these proximal fractures and that it is little, mainly to the one for whom there is study and use of this free book; since this fracture means to you in the main dispositions via rectal way in the restoration and stricture of him, and therefore understand well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	However, in the hand of the male when it is broken, take a cloth, and place the hand in that cloth; then wrap it in a drape, and wrap it, and leave it for three days or more, so that it heals.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	On the Restoration of Fracture of Bones When They Are Swollen.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient in you that you do not feel the fracture pain, and mainly if the bone is large, as it is the bone of the limb or of the adjutor, or similar to that, that you wrap it and rub it a little at first, if the conditions of the bloodletting allow it, so that it stops swelling.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the swelling goes away by itself, then consider that you do not feel it in retention, and if you powder on him with care, that you make a poultice and apply it to the injured part, or it stops going away.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	Then begin to restore the fracture in that same day, and do not prolong it, unless there is a plague.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	However, if the swelling occurs slowly, then you will begin to restore it within the ninth day, so that it stops being swollen, and do not approach it on the thirteenth day; since you would cause other accidents to occur.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	However, if the broken bone is pressing against the spine uncovered, then consider that you do not feel it in your back with ease and a little extension.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	And then if he is not yet prepared and the equation of him makes his legs too long, you reduce him by your own hands with this instrument; and it is an instrument made of iron, the length of which is seven or eight inches, and the breadth according to the amount of the plague; and therefore it is necessary for the doctor to have three or four of them according to the amount that you require in the treatment of any kind of fracture.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	Then return it, and make it a little smaller in order that the compression on him may not be doubled in the hour of the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And it is of acute edge to which margin there is in his extremities; and the upper part of him, that of large size, is placed between the cleats, and the lower part, that of small size, is within the cleats.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	This is the form of it:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	And it is called in Greek "labra volentz atelarem", and it is a little palette.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	So that the end of him may be supported, raised on the end of the bone prominent.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And then you put it on a table in such a way that the bone returns to its place, and make it level with some kind of equation.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And then you make an effort to place the ends of the fracture together, and if the broken end is thin, and does not allow the instrument for good operation, you cut the end of that bone in order that the instrument may have power over it.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	But if you cannot reduce the bone by means of the instrument which we have described, then cut it with one of the scalpel knives, or with a saw, in order that it may be reduced.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	Then remove what remains in the bone of sharpness and small scratches.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone is reduced, and the pain of the foot becomes violent, then you know that the bone has not returned to its natural position; and thereupon you give the patient great relief.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When your work on the bone is finished, then anoint it with a black ointment and especially if it is in summer, do not stop over the plague of the wound nor any other cause that might make it dry or corroded.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	Then administer the medicine in the hour of the patient's complete recovery from the fracture, and if there is a scar, cut it with scissors and bind it up; and use bandages according to the amount of the wound.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And keep it very carefully that the wound does not get worse by means of dirty hands, for small wounds sometimes make great ones; and they may cause great harm or death to the patient's body parts affected, so that it is cured.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if the break is different from those of other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	If the wound is large or evil and you fear for the patient from any of the accidents which we have described, and if there is pain in that place, then do not stop over the ointment; but apply to it a hard wrapping cloth instead of the ointment and tighten it well.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	When a day or two have passed, and the wound has begun to heal, then remove the cloth that you had placed over it with a sharp tool, and then administer cold water, as our custom is to do; thus, wash the wound thoroughly with the water in which we have made an ointment and some herbs.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	And you will see that the member has become less stiff and hard every day; and that it is prepared in such a way that the corruption runs from it into the cleats with ease.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If the wound does not heal or become dry within a few days, then you will see that it is useless and that the wound must be tried in another way.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And of those that heal slowly and leave scars, some are separated and others not; when you place the member in such a way that it does not hurt, then cut them as best you can.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	If it becomes red or black, so is a sign of inflammation and corruption; then stop putting any medicine on it which we have mentioned in this chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o .xxx.; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And of this putrefaction stop applying anything which we have described in the chapter on the treatment of wounds; but put the member where it can be seen, and bind it with a bandage as well as you can; and let no one think that he will die, for if it does not heal within ten days or less, then know that there is no remedy. Then cure the wound if it is visible; and leave the member if it is not.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter xx.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	On the Treatment of a Wound that Occurs in the Track of Some Fracture
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	This wound occurs in the track of some fracture and more especially as it approaches the joints, and greatly disturbs the natural movement of the member; and stops the blood from flowing to its part.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Then consider whether the injury is new and administer the medicines which have been mentioned here alone or in combination; but take some of them at a time, and apply them to the wound with a cotton wad; then compress it well with your fingers, and squeeze those over it in order to stop the flow of blood.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	Then let that rest for a few days; and then remove it and repeat the procedure, unless the wound has become clean; or tighten it over it with a thin plate of lead, because lead has the quality of absorbing all that is inflated in the limbs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If the wound has already become swollen and stiff, and it is necessary to cut it open, then cut it with the most powerful tool; then open it from above downward, and wash out that which is above the joint or below it, and make a clean incision there; and heal that part which needs to be healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter xxii.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	On the Restoration of a Fracture when Restored, and the Member becomes Soft and Flexible according to its Nature.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture is healed, and the member becomes soft and flexible, then know that it has been done so through various causes: of which one is the quantity of the medicine and the ligature with which it does not agree; or because of excess strictness in those ligatures from which food is withheld from the member; or because of too much broth; or because of excessive movement at the wrong time; or because of a pause in blood circulation in the part of the body.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	And the treatment of it is to make the patient fatten, and bring his heart into harmony with the body; then give him baths, and apply heat by means of a cloth and cooling by means of water.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	Then put a cloth on the member, in order that the blood may not flow from it or continue to pour water over it, so that food may return and run back to its natural form.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter xxii.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	On the Treatment of Broken Bones which have been Restored with Twisting and Disallowing any Operation on them if Necessary.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When the member has been healed by twisting and is free from swelling and prominence on the bone, and yet it does not prevent its natural movement; but you must not accept the word of one who says that a member which has been newly broken cannot be operated on.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	May already be at war with some doctors and healers who have done so much harm on our land; and this operation is most dangerous, losing great fear of the sign of which is deadly.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	If the swelling and pain are recent, then consider whether they are caused by water that is hot or cold, in which herbs are boiled; as well as leaves of alfalfa and mint and similar ones to those; and a paste made from a powder of althaea; or that a medicine be prepared with mint juice and mixed with gall; or that fig syrup be mixed with colchicum; and similar medicines to those that are called "amenorrheic consolidations."
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And sometimes it is dissolved by slow rubbing that is wet; and it is given at all times according to the need of the member.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	If the tortuosity is already present and has become severe and turns into a danger and causes the need for treatment with iron; then consider whether pus has accumulated on top of the bone, and the continuation of the bone has been dissolved, and whether it is necessary to remove what is superfluous of the swelling of that member by means of thin incisers; and administer it easily in that part with solicitude and study.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter 23.
De sermo en dislocacio.	On Dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is when one of the joints of the limb becomes dislocated, causing it to be immobile, and resulting in a deformity of the member, with great pain and injury.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore, when a dislocation occurs, it should be reduced quickly; because if reduction is delayed, the joint becomes stiff and difficult to reduce.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And it should not be stretched or moved in the hour of the reduction, lest it cause muscle spasms and pain.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	And when it happens to you, consider whether you should make an incision on the patient's thigh, and let the pus come out; and quickly reduce the dislocation with ease.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And each member be cured with water, from which the memory will return to its place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And I have already ordered the chapters on dislocation according to whether they precede fracture or not; from the top bone pus to the bottom pus.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter 24.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	On Treatment of Mandibular Dislocation (from the lower jaw).
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	If the two jaws are not tied up; and the dislocation of both is done in one way or another: either they are loosened a little by a small movement, or they are completely dislocated and then softened at the joint before saliva can come out from between them and their mouths can no longer be closed, and their tongues are wrapped in the words.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	When the dislocation of it is a little, then in most cases it returns by itself for a little while due to some cause.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	And if the dislocation is entire and complete, then consider whether it is administered with slow reduction, and not delayed at all.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And if the minister has the head of the patient, and inserts it between the two teeth of the dislocated jaw from inside the mouth, if the dislocation is on one side; or that he inserts both his two teeth together, if the dislocation is on both sides, and places the others outside where they belong; and orders the patient to cease moving their jaws and make them rest in that position; and the teeth are wrapped and tied up so that they return to their place.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if the reduction is difficult, and even more so if both jaws are completely dislocated; then administer it with water and oil, until the reduction of both is slow; but consider whether we have said:
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And therefore, when it returns and is wrapped up, and the mouth of the patient is closed and not softened, then pause on top of those dust-like drapes with cerot; and apply wax and oil mixture; and let it be tied with ease by soft leathery bonds.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And let the patient sleep on his side with his head between two pillows, so that he does not yawn to the right or left; and do not allow him to eat for a long time due to some cause; and have a sharp fork near by, so that when the pain returns and the jaws are locked, then take it and chew slowly.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And this water should be given easily; and do not work in the presence of the mouth due to eating and drinking and talking, so that the jaw is locked and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if the reduction of two jaws is difficult when they are dislocated at any time and do not return to their places; then consider whether fever and nausea will follow, and a strong odor will rise from the abdomen of the patient, and strong vomiting with pure colic will occur.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you see it again, know that it is a waste of time; and consider carefully the one to whom this happens in ten days.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	On Reduction of Mandibular Dislocation and the End of the Muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The furculum is not dislocated from the body by its own continuity to the feet; and some are dislocated at the end far away, and this is declared by sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And the restoration of it is that the patient sleeps on his side and spreads his legs.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	Then tighten the joint with your hand very firmly, for it will return by itself.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	Then pause on top of that paste and dust, and strengthen it.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	And the end of that which seizes and is continuous to it, is not dislocated on any day; then consider whether it is reduced and wrapped according to what we have said, and according to your dress.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	Then pause on top of that paste, and dust, and tighten it, and order the patient to adhere quietly and rest until it is healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And with this medication, the end of the muscle is reduced when separated from its joint.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	On Reduction of Muscle Dislocation.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	Know that the muscle is not dislocated unless it is torn at one end or the other; and the one that is dislocated is at the end of the titillative.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is that it is dislocated at the end of the muscle, and this is difficult; and it is not dislocated behind by the shoulder, and it is not dislocated in front by the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And most often it is dislocated and comes out at the ends, as in the case of titillative muscles, and most often it is dislocated slowly in those where the tissues are few; but in those where there are many tissues, it is dislocated with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And a strong blow will sometimes cause the muscle to be punctured or torn; and the muscle of it is pierced by water that has already been dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Then consider whether you can reduce it while standing on top of it, and then proceed with the treatment.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And it is recognized when the dislocation is at the ends of the titillative muscles; but distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the one next to it, for you see a great difference between them; and you see the concavity of the muscle at the end of the titillative, and that of the one next to it, so that one can touch the top of the muscle; and the patient cannot reduce his hand to his ear, nor can he move his head by all means.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is dislocated then move his foot or his leg, and you will hear a loud, clear pain, and do not cover it up.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And from this dislocation there is slight reduction when it is cold, and the patient is a child.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction of him is that the minister raises his hand to the patient's thighs; and approaches the strings attached, letting them tickle him, and raises the joint by strength in its place, and the minister raises the patient's hand, and extends it out. And then he lets go of those slightly.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	Otherwise, if by water that we have said does not return, and only from the beginning that an accident occurs, days later, let the patient be bathed in cold water, and administered brocations that soften and smooth him out like cow's milk, and fenugrec, and melilot in water, and administered.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	And the patient is to be raised up on his two hands and placed from the tickle wait for wool that is woven between levitation and constriction, and then the doctor places his foot over the hernia, and lifts up his muscle by virtue, and pulls down the patient' s hand so that it is not struck against those parts, and another minister holds his head, which is not struck against those parts, because that soon returns to its place.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you wish, reduce that second in this way: and it is that you put a man on his back who is taller than the patient, and he is on the side of that part, and inserts his hand from the tickle of the patient' s navel, and raises the tickle of the patient to the thighs, while he hangs up on air, and another minister pulls down the patient' s hand from those parts of his belly.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	Otherwise, if the patient is still, let it be known that another cause is suspended, so that this one, because the dislocation returns soon.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And it is reduced in another way: and it is that a long staff is placed on the ground, whose end is round in shape, as well as made of mortar, which is not thick or thin, and it is placed from the patient' s side; then let the lion skins be stretched over the staff, so that the patient stands according to the length of the staff, and his hand is extended to the sides of him by strength, because the joint returns to its place with speed.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if it is difficult reduction of him for all the causes that we have said, then use this cure: and it is that you take a staff whose length is two bras, and its breadth of four dizz, and its thickness is lightened in the preon of the tickle according to this form:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And then on top of the round staff are tied lion skins, so that the staff does not slide on the patient' s head.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And then it is placed from the tickle of the patient, and his hand or arms are extended over the staff within the sides, and the staff is tied to the assistant and arm at the end of the hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	Then the arm is placed on a step of steps according to its breadth, and the hand is extended from the sides, and the other hand is suspended from the other side, because the joint returns soon.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the instrument is complete according to each way that is possible for you, and then let it be known that you leave from the tickle wait for wool of a certain quantity; and then apply paste prepared of mortar of mill and egg white on all the muscle, so that it is turned over, and then tighten from the tickle by constriction; and the limb is turned over on the paste, and his hand is connected to his neck, and let it be, and not struck against his hand for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And since the patient' s food is reduced little, while his member is comforted, because it is easier to get better.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And then the food is given more, after seven or eight days, and exercise a movement; and if it stops and does not become soft, then it is healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	Otherwise, if the joint is dislocated by moisture that occurs to it or by another cause, then let it be known that there is administered cauterization by three touches, according to what has been said in the chapter of cauterization.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if all this is still done and seven days are passed, then the limb is separated, and the joint does not close, and the paste and constriction are a little soft on it, and do not close, and the muscle fibers or nerves at the head of the muscle have already been cut or extended or softened, and you know that the joint never closes in its place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	From the dislocation of that one which is caused by a fall behind or in front, the reduction is done by a sudden movement and an extension to the sides, while it returns.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And let be administered to that other constriction, and care to that one within that it is healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if it is late in the healing of the limb and slow in its movements, then the patient uses bath with cold water within that his gravity is lightened and returns to its natural state first.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	Of treatment of a dislocated collarbone.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	You know that the joint of the collarbone is dislocated with difficulty and seems to return with difficulty; and it is dislocated at all parts, especially in front and behind, and the dislocation of it is not covered up by your doing so little touch or so some form is dislocated, and when you adjust the dislocated one with the hand on the side, then let it be known manifestly, because the joint is bent and cannot bend the arm, nor touch it to its muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And since your cow is a dislocated one, reduce the dislocation soon in front because if you see it coming out with blood, then the reduction of it is difficult, and hard it does not heal completely; and more so when it is at the back parts, because it is worse than all the other kinds of dislocation, and more painful, and let these things be done to that one from which the joint comes out with blood, for the sake of the life.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And the restoration of him, when that one which is possible to reduce is done, is that his hand be extended by two sides, and his arms are spread out, and the sides of the doctor are over the collarbone and let it go, and press the joint with its fingers or the palm of his hand while it returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	Otherwise, if the dislocation is in front parts, then return it so that he doubles his hand by his side with his own palm, while it strikes the collarbone with its knuckles.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not obey to the reduction, then administer violent extension and press hard.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	It is that two ministers extend his arms, and hold him by the sides so that he does not fall down again after extension.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	And then the arms are turned over all parts, because they are wrapped with a double-length cloth around the hand of him, or limb.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, he unsets it with some oil so that this one is those causes which help in lubrication of the joint by ease; and then presses the joint with violent movement while it returns to its place.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	And then the reduction of him is done when he is placed on that paste in which is stiffened and mixed with egg white, and is extended by constriction from below; and the arm is suspended on its neck, and let it be left for a few days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And let it be unfastened; and if the joint is in its place, then unfasten the limb from it and leave it.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see that the joint is not stiff, then unfasten the plaster and limb again, and leave it for a few days before taking off the plaster; and then let it be unfastened.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	Or if it happens that gravity comes to the reduction of the joint, and its disposition is in motion, then administer humidification in bath and subtle friction, and compression, until it is relieved; or pause over the joint with relief, for if it is a thick mass, let it be bound, and leave it on the bone for a day and a night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And then hold that up, and put it in the bath; and when it has cooled, then rub the joint with moderate friction, and then repeat on it with relief, if it is noisy of movement, one time, and a second time, and third time,
corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denolam intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	Corruption has already spread over the denouement of the bath, as it is limited.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you want, pause over that hole of cow wet and sharp with the blade and stretch on it; and make some cuts, for that is wet and reduces to its disposition.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter .XXVIII.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	Of treatment of dislocation of the shoulders, if it is of the joint that it is between the arm and the shoulder blade;
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	Of the shoulder a few times it is displaced, and the reduction of its dislocation is slight, and the opposite is of the other joints, but it must be noted that there is speed in reducing it in the hour when it is displaced, before the place has become stiff or is aching;
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the reduction of its dislocation is that you pause the joint of the shoulder from the patient on a table and the minister extends the hand of it, and puts the palm of his hand or his knuckles on the proximity of the joint, and pushes it in until it returns to its place.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	But moreover it must be considered that if the palm is already laid on the belly of the hand, then the patient pauses the two of his hand on a table and its extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is previous then let the two of the hand be laid intricately on the table, so that the hand of the minister is over the proximity of the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And if it returns soon, it is good; and otherwise, then tighten it with bandages, yielding to the stiffness, and leave that; and do not repeat this, for, unless there are many days, it does not suffer nor can bear about the reduction of it quickly.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	But also the joint follows its course; and there is no cause for the patient, but his hand is soft and cannot tighten for any reason; then you will know that the nerves are twisted or knotted, and it does not follow that it should be strong until after the bandage has been taken off and applied again; and if you make a test with a sharp instrument near the joint, and let it go, then give him a cause.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	So then when it had recovered from the badness, then pause on it the bandage that you have re-tended, and let it be left and tightened for a few days; and then let it be unfastened and exercise the hand.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	But if the movement of it is strong and comes to some gravity, then let it be held with a wet cloth and some friction made on it, until it is relieved.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter .XXIX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	Of the treatment of the dislocation of the shoulders.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Some cuts are dislocated from the start.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when a joint of the hand is displaced to its two of the palm or belly, then tighten that joint and push the displacement of it with the thumbs, until it returns.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	And then support the tip of the finger, and hang it from the part to which it is displaced, and leave it for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	Then hold that up, and stretch that out until it turns on itself in that place of its day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when you are not busy, then stretch that second time, and do not cease to unfasten that in its day and exercise with movement, and stretch that at night; and make it for a few days until it is stiff.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	Then make it similar to the other, if it is displaced to the belly of the hand, and stretch that at that part, and make the first operation of the thumb, until it is healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And in the same way do for the other joint when it is displaced to another part.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter  .XXX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	Of the treatment of the dislocation of the shoulders.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When a complete displacement of the shoulder or collarbone occurs, and it is not cured after the course of treatment, then death awaits the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	The sign of this is that the patient's speech goes away from him by will, and he cannot retain it; and some of his limbs or two legs or two arms become soft, or one of them is broken, because sometimes it is broken and sometimes it is made; and sometimes it is broken.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Then that is already broken into four parts and is called gangrene.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	But the cure of it is that you should consider if the gangrene occurs from putrefaction, because there is no cure or recovery in that.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	But in that which happens by chance or by impact or by analogy with others, the Ancients used long speeches for the cure of it, which sometimes returns and is renewed; but I have seen and improved on it from its excess by my nearness to it by means of an explanation, and I will present it as I have found it and explained it.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And I say that in gangrene which occurs from the part ahead on the foot, there is no cure or recovery of that; and in an analogy with it, in that which happens to two legs.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And of those is not cured but that which occurs to the two properly by means of a bandage which I have re-tended.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And the patient is extended on its face over a platform raised from the ground, and the instrument of wetting is extended behind him so that it does not touch his feet.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	Then a stick is laid down in the ground at the end of the foot and turned over the head of the patient, and another is held in the air above his feet.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	And the minister holds the stick, and does not hold it in the pit; and another minister holds the other one according to that form.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	Then he covers the head of the patient and holds the little leathern belt tightly around it; and extends the end of the strap to the stick which is held above the head, and lays that over the ends of the straps and tightens them around his feet; and then adjusts all the straps and lays those in the other fust which is held above his feet.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And the minister drops the line to the start of the mast, and the two masts and the lines at their places are not re-rigged, but rather remain as they are, as we have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the doctor places his palms on the spine with strength until he returns, or until he places it on a table, and so that he can adjust his feet on the table until he returns.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	But if he does not return in this way, then take a table whose width or length is a third of a yard, and dig into the wall where we have said that the malady lies on one side of the table.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And place the tail end of the table on the spine, and the doctor places his feet on the other end, and so that the spine is pinched and returns to its place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you want, open the fold that is rolled up with the mast; and it is that you are on land you must place the head of the malady at the back of the ship two masts, whose length is a third of a yard, and you should place the head of him in the back of the ship exactly two masts; and the length is between each mast one palm, and so it is done on each mast turn by turn, and each one is stopped on land for it not to be moved.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And also a round mast in which is the fold, and turned in both folds of the two masts.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at the end of him is a fold in which is formed the mast, its length being a third of a yard and turned up; and similar to this in the other two masts.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And tighten the lines that you have stretched on the feet of the malady in the fold that is to be placed at the head of him, and the lines that you have stretched on his thighs in the fold that it is to be placed on his feet.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And so each fold should be turned and a minister should twist the fold on his mast, and the doctor twists the spine as we have said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	This is the form of the fold:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And when the spine has returned, and the place is covered up, then pour on the dry herb of huou, and then stir; and then place over the herb a table whose width is three fingers or less than that, and its length be the quantity that takes up the place of the yellow-ness, and at the start of the spine.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And then bind with the line that we have said, and use the food of subtle nutrition until it is cured.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if there is some urgency in the place at the end of the cure, then when the medicines are given that soften and clean up for a long time to come, which we have recommended; and it is given in that place a plate of lead.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And in some cases there is urgency at the back of the two spines, and it is caused by this dislocation; and it is that bone which you already suspect because it will not allow for making a late move with this medicine, for it would bring about his death.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	Of Cure for a Dislocated Hips
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	You should know that the joint of the hip and the connection of the muscle do not end but only dislocation, and it does not happen in those places that happen in the other joints with small movement and concavity.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the hip joint is dislocated in four ways, because it is dislocated at the inside, or at the outside, or in front, or behind.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And mostly it is dislocated at the inside parts, and less in front or behind.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	And the indication of dislocation in him is four: when you adjust the back of the patient with the cure that he has, it becomes longer and his blood pressure drops more than when he is cured, and the patient cannot bend his neck because his language becomes thin, and this is the place where the thinnness of the tongue begins to thin out, so that the head of the thigh has already come here.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	And the indication for those who have experienced this dislocation is four: when you adjust the front of the patient with the cure that he has, it becomes shorter and his blood pressure rises more than when he is cured, and the patient cannot bend his neck because his language becomes thick, and this is the place where the thickness of the tongue begins to thicken out, so that the head of the thigh has already come here.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	And the indication for those who have experienced this dislocation is four: when you expand the patient's back according to the compliment, but does not bend that one side of pain that it is on the side of the sun, and if it goes down to walk and cannot go forward because of that; and his urine is held back and his bile is thin, and so his walking is over the floor.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	And the indication for those who have experienced this dislocation is four: when you do not expand that side of pain that it is on the side of the sun, and if it does not go down to walk and cannot bend that one side because it bends the other; and the patient's back becomes shorter than the other, and his bile is thin, and this is the place where the head of the thigh has already come here.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	But the reduction of these spices for this dislocation is that you consider, then, if the dislocation is old and ancient, it has already become old before he dies; and therefore it is not in that cure of all; and then it does not allow a late move to be made.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	But in that one whose dislocation is recent, and it is one of the four species of dislocation, then you return to that joint and extend those at the inside parts and outside parts, and bend them to the right and left, because it easily returns and does not require another cure.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	But if it does not return in this way, then when you prepare the minister strong and extend the back of the patient from the front side, or under his sides, or with a line that is tied around his neck; and another minister extends the hand of the patient above his knees that his hands come out of them, and another minister makes points on the surface of the foot; and then tighten the line over the spine; and another minister holds the back of the patient on the area to prevent the patient from coming out.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And it is extended in him or in the front part to bend the hip at the joint of the furcula, or from the back part to the hip of two.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And it is extended in all these parts in one way within which the malady rises up to his head with his legs hanging down; and it extends from the ground.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	And this species of extension is special for all four.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And therefore if the dislocation returns at the joint that we have said, then it is necessary for all species that you tell about its own cure.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of him alone, when he is dislocated, and if the malady is raised on his side, then place the lines over the surface of the thigh in that location where the head of the thigh comes; and so extend the line from the hip joint to the front part of the furcula.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And another strong minister takes hold of the legs of the patient and tightens them at the back part by violent extension because it returns to its place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this is a lighter cure species with which this member is reduced, less than the other species.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	But if it is not obeying on you and does not follow this species of cure for all, then when the two legs of the malady are tied together with a strong line, and so they extend the two feet together and the two backs together.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And each of these two shall be longer by four inches than the other, and the cushion on the patient's chest shall be wider by two inches than that on his legs.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	Then hang the hernia over the top of the pole, and let it be lower most; and let its length from the ground be two hands.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	Then order a strong youth to cut the head of the hernia short, and let another youth hang the hernia by its tail; for the joint returns to its place with speed.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	Then, in reducing it alone, when it is dislocated outward, guard that the hernia remains over the foot according to what we have said while we are holding it gelled; and let the joint be made strong upon the patient's chest itself and on his legs.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	Then two poles shall be placed, one under the feet of the patient and another over his head; and two poles shall be adjusted to support the hernia, and let them wrap draping cloths around it so that the hernia is not dampened by the pole being between the patient' thighs, lest the extension towards the inner part be dragged.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	Then each minister shall extend it to its place, and the doctor shall suck up the reduction according to the art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Then, if you obey in reverse, lady be careful; and if not, pause over that diligently and so as we have said while holding it gelling by that sucking up.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	Then let the hernia remain hanging over its patient's chest in quietness.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	Then when the dislocation is towards the outer part of the legs, let the hernia be extended slightly, and this is according to the above narration about the foot; and the doctor shall place his right palm on his patient' chest, and let him cut that with the other, and let him make a cut at the inner side at the same time.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	Then when the dislocation is towards the back of the legs, then let the hernia not be extended at the inner part, and let it be raised up from the ground; so that if it is dislocated to the outer part, according to what we have said about the hernia's being placed on two poles, and its joints shall be extended, as we have said, and there shall be no turning back.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	Then let a compression be given to the hernia on the table according to where the joint is located.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Then when the reduction is completed as we have said, and the sign of the reduction is not hidden from you, and it is because you extend two hernia-cushions, and then you see those hernia-cushions being returned; and then you adjust two cushions and place a bandage on them so that the pole is not hidden at any of the sides; then attach the hernia to rest for three days or four.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	Then remove the joint and the bandage, and compare one joint to another.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	Then if you see those hernia-cushions in a firm position, and then let the hernia go away by walking.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	Then if you see a cause of softening, then you return and bandage that one, and let it stretch according to your first order; and let that go away in three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	Then remove that one, and let that one walk slowly over a certain number of days until it is comfortable again.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter II.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	Of Treatment of Joint Dislocation from the Back.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The back is dislocated according to three ways, because it is dislocated towards the outside, and towards the inside, and towards the inner side more than towards the outer side; and it is not dislocated towards the front.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	The sign of dislocation is when you command the hernia to apply its cushion to the joint; then you shall know that the back is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	Then the restoration of all dislocations is that you pass your hand over the hernia's right side, and let it already extend its joint; attach the hernia to the patient' side with strength, and another minister shall place his hand on the patient' back between the two poles; then let another minister stretch the pole within the time that the hernia returns to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	The sign of recovery is when the hernia' joint applies itself to the patient' joint with a non-laborious levitation.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Then remove that hernia and attach its joint to the joint with a bandage for three days or four, then remove those.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	Do not use the hernia-cushion for a certain number of days, until it is healed and comfortable again.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	Then if the reduction to you is justified, then let you give strong compression to those joints in which the hernia is cured according to the above narration about the joint' treatment.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter III.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	Of Treatment of Joint Dislocation from the Front.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The jaw sometimes is re-set by a small movement, and sometimes it is dislocated according to the complement, and its dislocation is done towards the inside or towards the outside.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	The sign of dislocation is when the jaw swells up to the side where it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	Then the treatment of the re-set jaw is a gentle recovery, and it is let to be extended with ease towards its place and be returned to its place.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	Then when the jaw is dislocated according to the complement, let you make your hand pass over the hernia' right side, and hold it with strength at its place in the center of the body; and let another minister hold it from behind on either side.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	Then let you stand to the patient' right side with your head turned towards him, and let you hold his left hand at the top of his head in the center of his body; and let you hold his right hand at the bottom of his head on either side.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	Then let you raise your head to the right side with your eyes looking forward, and let you extend your left hand towards the sky, and let you hold it there with two hands; then place your feet on either side of the patient' chest, and let your back be against his back; and let your legs be next to each other.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	Then you shall make two movements according to what we have counted.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	Then place your feet on the third time, and you are on the hernia.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	Then if the foot returns in one or two times according to this way, and if the foot swells up, then it is good; otherwise, then repeat the operation, for that foot returns.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	Then if to you is forbidden to reduce the hernia according to what we have said while holding it gelled, then let you hang the hernia by its tail on the ground, and let a servant place a mat under it; and let another servant stand between the patient' thighs, and make him step forward with his feet; then wrap a cloth around it so that the hernia does not escape from between the thighs.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	Then let the minister of the hernia hold its thighs, and let another minister extend the foot towards its ends or to the joint on the side; then let another minister extend the pole over the patient' chest or to the joint on his legs; and let him hold it with strength until it extends from its sides; then let the servant place a cloth between the hernia and the floor, so that the hernia does not fall from between the thighs.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	Then let the doctor suck up the dislocation with his hands, and let another minister hold the joint firm on its sides; because the dislocation returns easily.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And now, when the dislocation has returned and your health has been restored by the reduction, apply paste and extract it strongly with the hand, and tie the foot to the bed.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And since you fear or protect yourself from the nerves that are behind on the sole, so that the attachment to that is not violent and it is strongly supported.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	Then leave it alone for two or three days; and if the attachment is softened, extract it.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	Then remove it after three or four days, and forbid the patient from moving for ten days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	But if it is forced to go forward in that space, it is not sure that the dislocation is not dissolved and corrupted, and immediately stop it from receiving cure.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if it happens that the poultice is burned, then when you administer to the patient in the cavity of the poultice what we have preceded in our narration, in another place of cure and ointment, until it is renewed.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter.xxxiiii.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	Of treatment of joint pain from the words of doctors.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	But if that which is dislocated is wrapped up with a few extensions, it is moved easily; and if it is not difficult, advance slowly.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	But if the dislocation is in any of the two feet, then when you cut off the hernia from the foot on a piece of ground or a table, and leave it there as if it were going.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	Then stand on the feet, and place the foot that is dislocated on that which you cut off from the hernia, and place it correctly in order for it to return, and see if that has been wrapped up and does not appear in the prominent location.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	Then place under the foot of the patient a table that supports all the foot, which has two heads, and tighten it strongly and firmly for three days; and then remove it, and let the patient rest from walking for ten days, until it is healed and certain to recover.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter.xxxv.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	Of the types of joint pain that are caused by plague or fracture or any kind of trauma.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When any cause of the above occurs to you, and if you are involved in the cure of that person and in restoring them, watch out for certain signs of death.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And do not assume that the patient will improve because you have used a poultice, but only as far as the wise person in the art has ordered it, slowly, with mercy and compassion, not impatiently or arrogantly; and let him use, at the beginning of medicine, poultices that cool so much, and leave the hernia to the divine judgment, but only if you hope for salvation from destruction, with alleviation of the evil, and in which there is some hope.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	Then try to reduce it as soon as you can from the beginning of the cause, rather than applying a poultice after cure.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And then, if the member returns as soon as you wish, administer to it what cools so much that it cures the plague with water that softens it.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if the dislocation is due to a fracture and you are involved in setting the bones, then perform the operation and do as much for them as you have done for simple injuries of the joints, which preceded in the narrative of those.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And guard and avoid according to your virtue that instrument in the ways of danger as it has preceded in my prediction; for that is better to you than to your Creator, and remains ever in your glory, and salutes your true master in the right time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Thus ends the words of Al-Bucealis, which he has explained fully from them, for God's benefit.
Amen.	Amen.
