Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Thus begin the words of Albucasim.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	O sons, if I have completed this book for you, which is the last of the science of medicine, through its completion in it, and through its expositions and declarations, from my point of view, you will complete that to you with this treatise, which is the part of the operation by hand, and that is surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	Because the operation by hand is neglected in our region and in our time it is deprived of all, while greatly risking the science of it, and its practices are obscured; and nothing remains of it except a few small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which they distorted and led to errors, and confused the senses of it, and elongated its force and art.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And it is clear to me that you will enliven that through the ordering of this treatise according to the second way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and so that it may come with the forms of the tools of cautery and of other instruments of the work as it should be for addition through declaration, and for preparation of it, which cause is necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	But the cause why no good artificer is approved by his hand in our time, is because the art of medicine is long, and that its agent must first be exercised in the science of anatomy which recognizes the parts of members and their forms, and their conjunction and separation; and have the knowledge of bones, nerves, and vessels, and the number of these, and their issue; and of the pulsating veins and of the quiet ones, and the places of their issuing.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And for that Hyporcas says that although his name is great, in practice it is small, and especially in the art of the hand.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	But we have already said of that in the introduction to this book; because whoever is not learned in what we have said of anatomy, is not evacuated so as not to fall into error through which men will die, just as I have seen many of those, because some are formed in this science and they throw themselves away from it without knowledge or experience.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	Because I saw a foolish and experienced doctor who made an incision on a goiter on the neck of a woman, and he cut some arteries in the neck so that much blood flowed and the woman died in his hands.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And I saw another doctor who took a stone from a man's gallbladder, and the stone was large, and he took it out with a piece of the bladder, and that man died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And I called to him to stop that, and I saw that through the size of the stone and the disposition of the patient over him that he would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And I saw another doctor who received wages from a duke of our land for surgery, and he cured a black slave whose leg was fractured; and through the ignorance of the doctor, he removed the fracture over the wound with powders and splints with strong compression, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And he bound it according to his desires, and he relined it, and he left it for several days, and he commanded that we should not loose the bandage; and so it was as the leg and the thigh became infected with an ulcer, and it came to ruin.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And I was called to him, and I prepared to loose the bandage, and I found rest and ease of his pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	But nevertheless corruption was confirmed in the member, so that I could not restrain it, and the corruption did not cease to wander through the member until the patient died.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And I saw another doctor who perforated a cancerous ulcer, and it was open for some days, so that the evil of it increased through its lord.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The cause of which is that the rotten ulcer is pure of melancholic humour, then it does not reach him by iron or anything else, but that it be in a member that suffers so as to be hostile to it.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And for that, sons, it is necessary for you that the operation by hand be divided into two divisions: one is an operation associated with health, and the other is work through which there is peril in the major dispositions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And I have already discussed that in every place of this book where there is an operation in which there is error and fear; so it is necessary for you to guard against that and leave it, so that the foolish do not stop speaking and disgracing you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And thus take your arms with diligence and the protection of God; and your patients with facility and firmness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the better way through the grace of God so that you may attain health and praiseworthy succession, and lay waste to terrible illnesses of difficult cure; and hold your arms from what makes you fearful, so that trepidation in your faith and name may not escape you: for it remains for your glory, and more beyond in the world and in heaven for your sanctities.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Galia already said in some of his proverbs:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	“Do not heal illnesses ill, so that evil doctors are not named.”
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And I have divided this book according to three titles.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Begin the division of the book, and first of the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter ordered from the head to the feet, in the forms of instruments and tools of cauteries, and what is necessary in the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter, of cautery and piercing, and of leeches, and of plasters, and of extraction of arrows and of similar things, all titled and ordered in the forms of instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	Division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, of restoration and of dislocation, and of cure of tortion and of similar things; a chapter ordered from the head to the feet, and of the forms of instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	Of cautery with fire and sharp medicine and memory of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	With that begins the treatise of the whole book.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	I will tell you the quality of those cauteries and of their properties, and in what disposition cautery is prohibited.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore I say that the word of the quality of cautery and the property of it is long and prolix, and subtle through science, and secret hid; and many wise men have spoken much of it, and they disagree on it, and for me enough is a little of their words, fearing prolixity.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And therefore I say that cautery confers upon every complete disposition universally the which is of matter or without matter, excepting two dispositions, which are caustic dispositions without matter.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the caustic and dry disposition with matter disagreement; for some say that cautery is beneficial to it, and others the contrary of that, that cautery is not convenient in illness which is by quality and dryness, because the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and convening is that illness caustic and dry is cured by what is cauted and dry.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And he says the contrary of that, that by cautery there is benefit in every illness caustic and dry which one sees in the bodies of men, because when you compare the body of man and his humours to the disposition of fire, you find the body of man rubbed.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I say by the word of that, that experiment it already to me several times have discovered.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	But it is not appropriate to come upon this topic one who is inexperienced and un practiced in the chapter of cauteries through posterior exercise, and has not known the diversity of the complexions of men and the disposition of illnesses in their bodies, and their causes, and their accidents, and the span of time of those.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	But in other complexions, do not fear; and especially in moist illnesses, for all doctors have agreed on those, and have not disagreed on the use of cauteries on them.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And know, sons, that the secret of cure by cautery with fire and its goodness, is because fire is simple, whose action does not reach except to the member which is cauterized, and does not affect another member with it except with little harm.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	But the action of burning medicine reaches to those in members from which it is distant, and strongly brings the illness into the member with difficult cure, and strongly increases it.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	But fire, by its sublimity and the goodness of its substance, does not do that except to cause superfluousness. And it is known to us through experience and through the length of service of study on the truth of causes; and because of this I am excused from the length of speech. And if it were not that I am not read in your presence in this pauserer, a secret hid by fire, and the quality of the operation of it in bodies and of its expulsion through which you expel illnesses, by philosophical speech demonstrated, which would be acute in your feet.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And know, sons, that they disagree on the time when it is convenient to do cautery and pause the best time of spring.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And I say that cautery is convenient in all times, so that the damage by the accidental time is submerged in the improvement of what is drawn by cautery, and especially if the cautery is for pains or necessary pains, strong and fiery, which do not endure delay because it is feared of those who come to wickedness, which is greater than little harm coming by time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And thus do not cut into your feet, or sons, that which is not considered except by the common people and foolish doctors; it is because to that illness which is healed by cautery there is not a reduction of all time, and they pause that consequence.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the cause is not because they think it; for cautery is only in place of medicine which alters the complexion and dries up the moisture, which are caused so that pains come.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	But cautery is superfluous over medicine by the will of its strength and power, and greatness of his lordship.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	And it is possible that his illness returns at some time of the year, according to the complexion of the patient and the location of his illness, and its strength, and that which is prepared in his body from the accumulation of superfluities in him, and that which has come to him in his acquisition in foods and likenesses of those causes; but that the illness on which cautery was administered is subtle illness in a member of few superfluities and moisture, thus like cautery of a tooth for pain and likeness, it is possible that this pain does not return in him, but that is done in small ones.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	And yet the vulgar speech is that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, and it is a right speech, not so that they understand it in it, for they believe there is no cure which profits by medicine or other cause except cautery.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the cause is in contrary to that; and the intention that cautery is the last remedy of medicine is only when we administer the methods of cure in certain illnesses, and those medicines do not confer it, and yet at the end of the cause a man is administered cautery, and profits from it.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And then from here cut that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, not according to the intention which the vulgar and foolish doctors understand it.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And they said the ancients that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they did not say it except for the equality of gold and sublimity of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they said that the place of cautery does not do heat, when it is not absolutely true; for I have seen and proved that it does only in some bodies without the others, and cautery with that is good and better than with iron as they said; but when you do cautery with fire with gold, it is not declared to you, because it is heated according to the quantity that you will by the redness of the gold, and prepares to receive heat; and if you apply over it ignition, the gold melts into the fire, and drops some sheets so that the artificer cuts off by the occupation of that.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And therefore cautery is done with iron we must lightly and more closely to rectitude of operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have already ordered this chapter on cautery according to chapters, and have ordered those of the head within the feet, so that they ask from him what he wants of it.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	Of cautery for pain in the head for coldness and moisture.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter:
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cautery confers with moisture and coldness about the superficial accident of which it is two causes, so is cause of soda and multitude of fluxes, called corissa, from the parts of the ears and the auricles and flowing, and multitude of sleep, and pain of teeth, and of goiter, and generally of all illnesses that come by coldness, thus with paralysis, apoplexy, and likeness in those illnesses.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cautery is that first of all you command the patient to be evacuated by laxative medicine of the head purging, for three or four days, according to the strength of the patient and his age and custom.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then command him that he shaves his head with a razor, and then let him lie between your knees on a low bench, and let him rest his feet on you.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then pause the edge of your palm close to the nose between the eyes.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	But yet, when the point of the middle part is reached, sign that place with a tent, and then heat the cautery olive of which this is the form.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And then pause it over the point marked by the tent, in such manner that the hand be stretched little by little, and you revolve him.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And then lift your hand lightly and look at the place, and if you see already some part of the head discovered, as well as any amount of bones, then lift your hand again, and if it does not return to you with that iron, with another one, if it is cooled off, between while be seen by you what I have said.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then take a little salt and dissolve it on the place and let him lick that for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then pause over it cloth drenched in vinegar and let him lick that over while the scar of the fire is destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the place with four-ingredient ointment, so that it is healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And they said that when the Roman plaster is open, as many meals give heat, for it is better and more healing.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And they said some of them that the jaw be cauterized within the bone, and it is held the cautery within while some part of the substance of the bone is burned.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And then let him lick that which is burnt in the bone, and then let it be cured.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	Others say that when the cautery reaches the bone it produces a strong impression on it, and that this is the way to treat small ulcers.
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And they believe that the vapors of the head are expelled from that place.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And if a wound is left open for a long time, it should be treated until it is healed and consolidated.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	But I have not seen these two species of cautery at all, except in some men according to the way of fear; and that which leaves, by my opinion, is better for health when it is; because the head is devitalized by solution of continuity in it also as we have testified in other members, and mainly when the head of the patient is of a phlegmatic nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the species of the first cautery is more safe and better by my opinion; and with it we use and act for health.
Capitol segon.	Chapter second.
Del cauteri del cap.	Of the cautery of the head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When in all the head there happens chronic and long pain and this is prolonged in the patient, and he uses herbs and clysters and caput medusae and plasters and cataplasms and lances and poultices and hot stones and similar remedies, and mainly if he has already been cauterized with a cautery which we recount and does not benefit him any of those causes, then consider that if the head of the patient is of strong creation in its nature; and it is phlegmatic and finds great heat, then cauterize with another cautery after that one a little.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And then cauterize that above the horn of his head with a cautery until the membrane is split.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	The membrane being split and the quantity which we have recounted being discovered from the bone, cauterize that with a cautery in the posterior part of the head in the place which is called vas, — and it is that place in which the cupping-glass is applied.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And hold your hand over that, and do not discover the bone, because the patient by that finds much greater pain than from the pain of all the other cauteries of the head.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And I say to apply this cautery in its place, because the cautery with which you cauterize the horns of the head and the occiput is a more subtle cautery than that with which the middle part of the head is cauterized; and it is applied as follows:
Capitol ters.	Chapter third.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	Of cautery of not antique emigration.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When suddenly in the anterior part of the head there is a painful swelling, or the pain extends to the eye, evacuate the head with purging medicines, and administer the other cure, which I have described in the chapters on diseases; and if all does not benefit, cautery is applied to it in two ways: either cautery with an acute medicine burning, or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	But cautery with a burning medicine is that you take an almond, and scorch it and rub the ends of it on both sides of the head.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	And then pierce the place of the pain in the temple with a pointed lance until it is made in it beneath the membrane, as far as it can be felt.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	And then press on it with a bandage tightly bound, and leave that for the space of three hours; and then remove the bandage and treat the almond, and let the wound for two or three days, and then apply to it oil sprinkled with alum as far as the place makes blisters.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that with an ointment until it is healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you will, do this with some burning medicines which I have written in the two tractates of burning medicines.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	But the cautery with iron is done according to this way: heat an iron cautery of which this is the form:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	and it is called claus clavilis, because the head of it is like the form of a nail in which there is some curve, and in the middle part of it is a small prominence.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	And then apply it to the place of the pain, and hold your hand — so that the cautery which is beneath is not touched — and move the iron little by little with speed.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the quantity of it that is burned by the thickness of the membrane as far as the size of it, and raise your hand so that the artery which is beneath is not touched, so that there does not come a flow of blood.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then moisten a cloth in salt water and apply it to the place, and leave that for three days; and then apply a cloth moistened with wine, and cure with an ointment until it is healed.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you will, cauterize with the point of the scalpel according to the cautery, and beware of incision of artery in this not antique emigration properly.
Capitol quart.	Chapter fourth.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	Of cautery of antique emigration.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you cure emigration with what we have said of the cure preceding, and what we have said in the chapters on diseases, and the cure does not benefit, and you see in the disease that it does not suffice to it what we have said of the first cautery with medicine or of the cautery with fire, then when you ignite the cautery cutler until it is whitened, then indicate over the place of the pain with a line of length of which is the size of the digit, or as much as that; and laying your hand by one side, and piercing it into the artery and coming to the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However it is necessary to you that you guard against the continuation of the jaw, which is injured because of mastication, and that the ligament not be burned and the nerve which hurts that, and that no spasm come upon it.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it is about the custody and care of flow of blood from the artery which is incised, because in the incision of it there is danger, and mainly to him who ignores what he does and is inexperienced and unskilful; and let the operation begin in that place.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And I will come with remembrance of the regimen of flow of blood from the artery according to his manner, in that free space.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see of this disease that it does not suffice this cautery and see the body of the patient tolerable, cauterize that in the middle part of the head as we have recounted, and cure the wound until it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you will administer the cautery which we have said in the chapter of incision of artery with cautery having two points, and this cautery is better and more suitable.
Capitol .v.	Chapter fifth.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	Of cautery of pains of ears.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When in the ear there is pain from friction and it is cured with lactic causes and with the other cure which I have said in the chapter, and the pain is not relieved, then ignite the cautery, and this is the one which has the name puncta, of which this is the form:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	And then puncture it with the point and carry it around the whole ear as it is turned, or in the circuit of whichever part if the pain is in whichever.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Long it with the cautery of the edge of the ear few by few until you feel the place with touch.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the cautery of ten points in all the ear, and those around it, and then cure the places until they are healed.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter sixth.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	Of cautery of torture.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	Torture which is cured and by cautery is not excepted from the remedies which come through phlegm, according to what we have said in the chapters on diseases.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cautery of the part that hurts due to dryness or due to a spasm in the nerve.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you treat this kind of torture with potions and bloodletting and poultices, and your treatment does not help, then you should cauterize the patient with three cauteries: in the first place, you must cauterize the root of the auricle; in the second place, a small cautery below the temple; and in the third place, you must cauterize the junction of the two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And apply your cautery on the side that hurts, because softening only comes to the part that appears to be healthy.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	And the way to do cauterization is that you must cauterize the auricle on the right side of its upper extremity a little above the horn of the head, and another one in the temple, the length of which should be according to the length of the finger toenail; and you must apply your hand with the cautery until half of the thickness of the cord is burned.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the form of cauterization, and it is a specific of the cutler, the shape of which is like a table knife.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	But indeed more subtle is that one a little bit so; and it is necessary to cut in him of superficial grossness a little bit.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the place with what is before prepared until it is healed.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter .VII.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	Of cautery of ancient apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it with what we have said, and your medication does not help, and the patient has no fever, then you should cauterize him with four cauteries: over all the horns of his head; and with a cautery on the middle part of the head, as we have said before; and with a cautery in the neck.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the way to do cauterization is done according to what is above said.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And it is cauterized over the mouth of the stomach; and it is more behind; and then it should be treated with what is prepared.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter .VIII.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	Of cautery of oblivion made by flame.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	And you should give the patient at the beginning large potions and purgative pills.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	And then scrape the whole head of the patient and apply on the neck of him plaster of cedar described in the treatise of plasters.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And apply that some times, for that is the way to do cauterization.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And do that according to that medicine which I have said before.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And if he is healed by that well, and if not, then do to him three cauteries in the back part of his head, which descend from the uppermost part of the head to the lower part of the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And pause between each cautery the thickness of a finger, and then treat the cautery with what is prepared.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	But if you see that he can tolerate it and the patient is that strong, then do to him cautery in the middle part; and if you see greater strength, then do cauterization on both horns.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Then treat that until it is healed; and let the cautery be olive oil according to the form before given.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter .IX.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	Of cauterization of hernia and of softening of the whole body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	And you should process cleansing of the head with potions and with what we have said; and then scrape the head of the patient, and then cauterize him with cautery in the middle part of the head, and with cautery on all the horns of the head, and with cautery on the back part of him, and with three cauteries on the vertebrae of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the softening of the body of hernia and the patients tolerate it, and the illness is strong, then do to him four cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and lastly with cautery until half of the thickness of the cord is burned, and lift up your hand.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	Then treat that until it is healed, and let this be olive oil cautery.
Capitol .x.	Chapter .X.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	Of cauterization of epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	The epileptic is not cauterized except that epilepsy is due to phlegm.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And then cleanse the brain of him at the beginning with herbs and with the other treatment which we have said in the division when the patient is big and can tolerate the exception of medicines.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it is a child who does not endure medicines, then administer poultices and masticators the servant cleansings, before for several days, with the benefit of foods.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	And then scrape the head of the patient, and then cauterize him with a cautery in the middle part of the head according to the previous way, and with another cautery on the back part of his head, and on each horn of his head you must cauterize.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is strong and can tolerate it, then do to him cauteries which I have said, having paralysis and softening of the body on the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And let the cautery be olive oil according as it is before.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	But if the patient is a child, then apply subtle cautery according to this way.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter .XI.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	Of cauterization of melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupt humidities and phlegm, then do to him cauteries which we have said in having paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is excess phlegm declining into melancholy, and the body of the patient is cold, then give to him to drink what cleanses the brain of him according as it has been said in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	And then scrape the head of the patient, and then make a decently made sponge of lye on the circle, and then apply it in the middle part of the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And the patient must be lying down, and he must hold his entire body.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And then apply linen; and it is also worthy of lamb's wool.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And heat that over the fire with moderate warmth by measure, which the patient can endure when he is in him.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	And then apply it in the middle part of the head in the circle, and wash it when it is cool.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And do that to him once every week for one day, and let him have the other regimen of him well until it is healed; or if you want, cauterize him making small points according as he can endure them, except that you must hold your hand over a cautery in this way arranged: this is a specific cautery which softens the brain with equality.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	And then place that cut part in a bath of warm water or in a bowl of rosewater.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	Of cauterization with descending water.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When you have observed the beginning of water in the head through the signs which I mentioned in the division, then begin and give to the patient something to drink that cleanses his head, and guard him against all humidity.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And let him bathe in warm water for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	And then command him to wash his hair, and cauterize that with a cautery in the middle of the head; and also cauterize that with two cauteries over the temples if it is the beginning of water in both ears, or on one side if the water begins in one ear.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Cut with a cautery all the veins and arteries that are under the collarbone; and the cauteries should be in that length in the breadth of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And guard against bleeding when it is cauterized; and if you see any bleeding from him, stop it with some medicine which is possible for you.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And I will come with wisdom which is in the extraction of arteries and with abstention from those and cauterization to prevent bleeding.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And sometimes it is cauterized in the nape under two bones with two cauteries recently produced.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	Of cauterization of old tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When tears from the ears are long-standing and persistent, and through the veins and arteries which are in the most obvious location on the head, it is verified that this is an excess of phlegmatic moisture, then cauterize that with a cautery which we have recounted in the chapter on the beginning of water coming into the ears, and with a cautery in the middle of the head, and with two cauteries on the nape under two temples, and with two cauteries on the nape under two bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if you see any discharge of matter, then cauterize that in every part of the ear canal at the end of the upper jaw with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	Of cauterization for fetor of the nose.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you are treating someone with what we have said in the division and your treatment does not prove beneficial, then prepare and give the patient enemas for three nights; and then shave his head, and cauterize that with a cautery made of olive oil.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And also cauterize that with a cautery of cloves with two cauteries over the two upper jaws under the hair, a little one.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And guard against the artery so that you do not ignite it.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And of the cautery of cloves this is the form.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	Of cauterization for softening eyelids of the ears.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the ear is softened by sickness or humidity, then cauterize that eyelid with one cautery with this cautery of the moon; and this is its form:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you wish, cauterize that over the two upper lids a little with two cauteries all around, and they should be elongated from the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And let the length of each cautery be according to the amount of the eyelid.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery, but according to how much the upper part of the eyelid is swollen.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	Of cauterization for the eyelid of the ear when hairs have become ingrown and pierce the inside and poke the ear.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the hairs of the ear become ingrown so that they pierce the inside and poke the ear, there are two ways to cauterize them, either with a cautery of iron or with a cautery of burning medicine.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If you cauterize it with fire, command the patient to wash his hair so that he does not hurt himself when he cuts off those hairs, until they are long and smooth; and if the ear is punctured by them, then strengthen his ears with a bandage so that he is not hurt as the hairs grow.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Thus when they grow and are smooth, then put the patient's head in the warm water, and then sign on the eyelid of the ears with a mark, a sign which is according to the figure of a dead leaf, and let the beginning of that sign be near the hairs.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And then put paste made with white vinegar or mullein on the ear.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And then ignite the cautery of which this is the form:
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And then cauterize over the figure which you have marked, bit by bit, in small circles, until the surface of the collarbone is burnt up which is as it were with a myrrh leaf, all appearing properly.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	And the sign of health of your work is that you see the eyelid of the ear already contracted and the hairs of it raised above the puncture of the ear.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And then lift your hand and let him go for three days, and then put on him paste made with oil until the scar is healed.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that with ointment until it is healed.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	But if they return for any reason and the eyelid is softened, then do again the cautery on that all around as you did at first.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	But if the hairs are under the eyelid, then cauterize that until it is raised to its natural place and is smooth and the hairs do not poke the ear.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	But the cautery with burning medicine is that you command the patient to wash the hairs until they are long and smooth, and then let the cautery be made of linen in the form of a myrrh leaf.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. .i., o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And then take some boiled lye and live coal mixed with it. And you shall take some boiled lye and live coal mixed with it. You shall take that mixture and add to it some live coal, and make that into a poultice so that it is not cold; and then spread that on the cloth which is made as the form of a myrrh leaf, and put that on one or both ears; and let the patient's head be in the warm water, and his hair in its natural position.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And hold the cloth over the medicine and press it gently so that the patient does not feel the biting of the medicine, for the biting is in him as with fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And when you perceive that the biting has ceased, then take away the medicine and wash the ear with water; and then consider if you see the eyelid raised as it is washed or as a result of being bound up with fire or with an incision, for then it will be well; and if it returns over that on which the medicine did not work its effect and does not darken until your operation is healed and the ear contracted.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And then put on it paste made with vinegar of wine or with another ointment until it is healed.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary for you, after your operation that you watch with great diligence that no pus comes from the ear, and if the eyelid after several days is softened and some cause of the hairs poking in the ear, then repeat your medicine on that location of the eyelid which is softened, and particularly as you did at the beginning, and bandage him up until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is the form of a myrrh leaf.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And know that the bodies of men are diversified according to size and smallness, and therefore according to this is made your contraction.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	Nor is it hidden from those who follow this path that it is studied in this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter .xvii.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	Of cauterization of a fistula that is in the tear duct of the eye.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you are treating a fistula and have not had success with what we have said in the divisions of diseases, then you must cauterize it as follows: order the patient to put his head on your lap, and have someone else hold the patient's head still between their knees so that he doesn't move or shake his head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	Then place a cotton wad soaked in vinegar or in a poultice of poppies over the tear duct.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And heat the cautery, of which this is the form:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	which must be hollow, as it is shaped like a reed or a pen made of vulture feathers, from one end of which the cautery is made.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you wish, it may extend into the other end.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you want, it can go out like a tent.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	But that which is hollow is better for your work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And press the fistula if it is open and draw out from it pus and dry it up.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not open, then open it and extract the rottenness from it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And apply the cautery, which should be well heated, to the eye at the start of the nose so that your hand does not tremble or the patient become disturbed, and then apply the cautery to the edges of the tear duct and corrupt it there.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And so if at the beginning of your cautery it pierces into the bone, that is good; and if not, then repeat the cautery once or twice as necessary, and leave it there for three days, and apply a poultice of dry powder over it until it is healed.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	But if eleven days have passed and it has not healed, then apply a corroding acute medicine so that the bone is uncovered and scrape it according to what is convenient in its chapter.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And there is another way to cauterize a fistula which some first said: enter the site of the fistula and open it and then place in that fissure a subtle bed of which its shape is as follows: melt an ounce of lead into it; and hold your hand steady with good control so that the patient does not move, and do not let the melted lead reach the eye of the patient; and place over the eye of the patient a cotton wad soaked in vinegar or water, for the lead will adhere to the site of the fistula and heal it by a wonderful cure.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed by what we have said about cautery and cure, that is good; and if not, then it is necessary to apply a tracheotomy and reduce the fistula in the nose according to what comes into its proper place.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter .xviii.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	Of cautery of the split of the ear.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Many times fissures occur in the lips and mostly in children.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Therefore, when you treat those fissures with what we have said in the divisions and your cure is not effective, then heat a small cautery knife according to this shape that it fits into the fissure:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And its cavity should be according to the thinness of the blade.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Then apply it carefully into those fissures so that the cautery reaches the depth of the fissures.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And then heal that with ointment until it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter .xix.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	Of cautery of a fistula in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When in the root of the uvula or on the palate or on the roots of the teeth there is an abscess and it becomes swollen, and when it is burst, and when it is old, and is corroded, and a fistula is made, and you cure that and your cure is not effective, then know that you should heat cauteries according to the amount that is received in the fistula, and then apply the hot cautery into the opening of the fistula, and hold your hand so that the iron reaches the depth of it, and do this once or twice; and heal that with what we have said about cure until it is healed.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And so if the pus is discharged and it is healed, that is good; and if not, then it is necessary to uncover the site and scrape off the rottenness according to what comes into its chapter.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter .xx.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	Of cautery of teeth and of softening of ulcers.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the ulcers are softened by moisture and the teeth are shaken, and you cure those with medicines and your cure is not effective, then have the patient hold his head in your lap, and heat the cautery of which its shape will come next, so that you apply the poultice over the tooth and insert into it the hot cautery quickly, and hold your hand steady so that the patient feels the heat of the fire on the root of the tooth from which it is coming.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	And then lift up your hand and repeat the cautery several times according to what you wish.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	And then the patient should gargle with salt water and keep it in his mouth for an hour, and then spit it out, for the shaken tooth is made firm, and the soft gum is made strong, and the rottenness is dried up.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter .xxi.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	Of cautery of toothache.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When toothache is from coldness, or in it is aching or green, or the cure does not work with medicine, then the cautery on it is according to two methods: either cautery with cow's dung, or cautery with fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Cautery with dung is that you take cow's dung and boil it in a pot made of iron, and then pick up a piece of cloth and wrap it around the end of the needle, and then dip that in the hot dung and apply it quickly to the aching tooth so that it becomes cold.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And then repeat that several times until the strength of the fire reaches the roots of the teeth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you wish, dip wool or cloth in the dung above, and apply it to the tooth that hurts, and place over that hot iron so that the iron reaches the depth of the cavity of the tooth.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	But the cautery with fire is that you take a needle of iron or of steel, and there is in it some thickness and the acuteness of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	Then heat the cautery of which its shape will come, and apply it to the tooth and hold your hand so that the cautery is cold; and do that several times because the pain usually remains or in that day or in the other day.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And know that by force of that cautery that the patient fills his mouth with good breath and keeps it for an hour, then spit it out, and this is the form of the cautery.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And you cauterize by which you see the end according to what is possible to you.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the form of the needle:
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	Of cautery of excrescences.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When excrescences are of phlegm and of cold humors and they do not yield to digestion with medicines and you see the digestion of those slightly, then heat a cautery whose shape is as follows: having two ends hollow so that smoke comes out from the cautery through one end, and apply it ignited over the excrescence once, and if you need, then repeat it, until it reaches the depth of the excresence.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the boil is small, then apply the cautery according to the size of the boil, and let it burn for three days, and place a poultice on it made from boiled oatmeal, until what the fire has burnt is healed.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	Then treat this with ointment and bandages and linen until it is healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And the shape of the cautery or needle should be such as to suit the purpose.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter 23.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	Of cauterization of any wound and of constriction of a vein.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When humidity comes upon the gullet of the lung, and especially when it is caused by coldness of complexion, then the patient should first be evacuated with laxative medicines, and then the root of the gullet cauterized in the affected place.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And take care that you do not reach with the cautery into the gullet, or burn his windpipe but only a little.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And cauterize this with another cautery behind the junction of the neck at his last vertebra.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	And the cautery for him should be a red-hot iron according to the previous manner.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	Then treat this with what has been mentioned until it is healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter 24.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	Of cauterization of sickness of the lung and of cough.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When cough and sickness of the lung are caused by cold humidity, and the patient does not have fever or consumption and it is an old sickness, then cauterize this with two cauteries over the furcula in the affected places, lion-like and bull-like; and with another cautery in the middle place between the two nipples; and let the cautery be red-hot according to the previous manner.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, let your cauterization be pricked with the cautery which is called a point, the form of which precedes in the puncturing of ear-aches.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And let the pricks be within these; and treat this with what has been mentioned until it is healed.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And if the cautery has three points, because cauterization can be done with this: with one incision you can do three cauteries according to this form:
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	Of cauterization of the tics, which is the head of the helper.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the head of the helper is dislocated due to slippery humidity and does not return in its hour of returning because of this dislocation until it is returned to him, and especially if by a small movement it is displaced so that it should be, as we have testified, then first reduce the dislocation, and let the patient return to his back or on his side; and elevate the windpipe which is in the part within the tics to the parts above with the fingers of your left hand, if the joint is dislocated to the inner parts.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And take the cautery having two points; and this is its form:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And cauterize the windpipe so that it penetrates to the other side; and the figure of cauterization will then be in the form of a cross with four cauteries.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And it is subtle according to the quantity of tent; and this is its form:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And sometimes it is adjusted according to this account, and because there are eight cauteries.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And put parsley on the cautery, and let the patient be made to adhere to tranquillity, and let the member not be troubled for some time until it is comforted.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is to the upper parts and it has been done, then cauterize over the muscle with a red-hot cautery or with many pointed cauteries, for the joint is made firm, and the humidity is driven out and the patient is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	Of cauterization of the stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When there comes in the stomach churning and many humidities enter so that these are extracted from his complexion and multiplied in him, and if you continue the manners of cure and do not confer with each other, then let the patient lie on his back, and extend his arms and legs, and cauterize this with three cauteries: with one cautery below the feet according to the quantity of a finger with a red-hot cautery, and with two cauteries below the ribs of the cautery so that the figure of cautery becomes triangular; and stretch between these which are not adjusted so that they will make heat.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cautery is the quantity of two-thirds of the thickness of the windpipe.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And let the figure of the cautery be according to this form with addition, and if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle place of the stomach according to this form; and this is a cautery according to the form of a circle according to this form:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And let the stomach be punctured to that which of this cautery is frightened: and you feel on the stomach point according to the quantity that you wish with tent, and then cauterize this with cautery in the points; and treat this with what has been mentioned until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	Of cauterization of the fretted liver.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When there is liver pain because of coldness or because of humidity or because of grossness within so that from his normal complexion there has been produced by egression in excess, and it is cured the patient with what we have said and do not confer with each other, then let the patient lie on his back over his spine, and feel with tent three cauteries according to this form and this quantity pressed upon the liver below the hypochondria where man lies.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And let the space between each cautery be according to the thickness of a finger, and let the cautery be according to the length of the body straight.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not press it with the cautery hard.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the quantity of that which is burnt the quantity of the thickness of the windpipe, and let it not be pressed hard; and if the patient stands on his feet, then let him sit, for he has already extended his arms, and elevate his arms.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And it is for you to cauterize these cauteries with cautery cutlass, when you have subtlety and prudence in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And take care that you do not proceed too far in cauterization, and let the windpipe be burnt all through so that it reaches into the bowels, for the windpipe here is subtle; and know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	Of piercing of an abscess of the liver with cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When there is excision or abscess in the liver and you want to know whether this abscess is in the flesh of the liver or in its tunic, then if it is in the flesh of the liver the patient will have heavy breathing and the pain will be sharpened.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the tunic of the liver, with great pain and often the physicians have become tired of curing him.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore let the patient be laid on his back; and feel the place of the abscess with tent; and take the cautery which is assembled like a rake, the form of which has preceded in the other page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And cauterize it with this cautery so that all the windpipe is burnt, so that it reaches into the diaphragm, so that phlegm emerges.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And treat this for the cure of other abscesses until it is healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And let whoever uses this form of cautery use only that which he has studied in the art of medicine, and through the marks of which many illnesses have become known to him; but let this be tried a few times over this operation, but nonetheless it is better.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	Of cauterization of sores.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	The ancients say cautery of the roots of aristology is applied to sores according to this manner: it is that you take from the roots of aristology a long root which is found, and it should be as thick as a finger.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	And then you submerge it in oil and heat it up, and then cauterize with a cautery on the location which is between the continuation of the furcula to the neck; and use two small cauteries guided slightly downward from the part that is below the beard, and use two cauteries on what is declining between the fifth rib and the armpit, declining slightly to the rear parts; and use another cautery in the middle location of the foot; and use another over the stomach, and use three cauteries of the rear parts; and use a cautery in that location which is between the two shoulders, and use two cauteries on the sides of the feet, below the cautery which is between the two shoulders.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And let whoever grasps the cautery with his hand, not close it in the grip of the fist but rather in the open grip.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And some ancients say that some of the people who use cauteries of iron similar to a needle, ignite it and put it in that location which is between the ribs, until we reach with it to that apostema and there be discharged a healthy pus, as we have said regarding the apostema of the liver.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	But in this piercing with a cautery there is no fear, for one dies suddenly when it occurs in the location of a fistula to which there is no remedy.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter 30.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	Of the cauterization of the melos.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you cure the illness of the melos with what we have said regarding the cure in division and do not confer your cure, then cauterize it according to three methods, all of which are straight, one of which is that you make three or four lines according to the length of the melos according to the figure of the cauteries of the liver, the figure of which has preceded.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And let there be between each cautery the thickness of a finger or a little more, and the manner of the cautery is the same as we have said regarding the cautery of the liver with equal parts.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not grasp the cautery with your hand, and let the patient be on his back.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And there is another manner of cauterizing, which is that you ignite the cautery having two layers, the cause of which we have said in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and elevate the tendon which is in the end of the melos through which passes the jaw of the patient on the left.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And let your elevation with which you elevate the tendon be according to the length of the body, so that there are made cauteries according to the breadth of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	Then insert the two layers, ignite them, into that location through which you penetrate the tendon on the other side.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And then extract the cautery; and thus there are made four cauteries.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you wish, cauterize with a cautery having three layers.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And then you cure the cautery when it has stayed for many days, for indeed the other causes precede in the cure.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	Of cauterization of hydrops.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cautery does not cut into hydrops but rather incises it properly.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you cure hydrops with the manners of cure which we have said in division and do not confer your cure, then cauterize it with four cauteries around the ombelicus and a cautery over the stomach, and another cautery over the liver, and another cautery over the melos, and two cauteries between the shoulders of the back, and a cautery on the right side of the foot, and another cautery over the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the quantity of the depth of the cautery should be proportionate to the thickness of the tendon.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	Then let the cautery remain open so that it may heal for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not discharge the patient from cure after cautery so that there may be added to him two intentions and he remain sick with him through the help of the cure.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The form of the cautery with which the belly is cauterized should be round according to what is above it, and that with which the back is cauterized should be oval according to what precedes it.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter 32.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	Of cauterization of feet and thighs.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are apostemized in hydrops and they are filled with yellow water, then cauterize the feet on the top of the foot in the space between the auricular and the annular, and elevate your hand with the cautery and do not twist it; then elevate your hand and do not return it at all, for the yellow water will flow out.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	It is the cautery according to this form: then make two cauteries on both thighs, and in each thigh let there be made a cautery with the tip of the cautery blade.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And let the cautery be according to the length of the thigh: one from below and the other above the middle part of the thigh, and on each thigh two cauteries.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And let the wound remain open during a long time for a cure so that any water may flow out from it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	Then cure them with those causes which we have said.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter 33.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	Of cauterization of body of belly.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When the body of the belly is for chafing and for moisture within which weakens the vertutes, which are in the stomach and in the intestines, and it is cured that with the manners of cure and does not confer, then the patient suffers cautery of the vertue exhiberant, then cauterize it with a large cautery over his stomach according to what has preceded in the cauterization of the stomach, with the cautery of the circle and four cauteries around the ombelicus subtly, and with cautery clavih subtle; and cautery over the alcatenus above the os gran, or two cauteries.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if you see the moisture exhuberant and the patient tolerates it, then cauterize it over the pentenilhu and over the intestines, and strongly apply two cauteries on the stomach near the inguons, for this is a perfect cure of the juice of which there are no errors.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter 34.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	Of cauterization of ancient hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When there are in nature derier ancient hemorrhoids or of gross humors chafing or of moistures corrupted, and they are cured with what we have said in division and do not confer your cure, then cauterize them with three cauteries over the pus below the small spondyl of the back triangularly, and with cautery above the ombelicus through two ditz.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if his stomach is chafed and his food is not digested, and his face is apostemated, then cauterize him over the stomach with a large cautery according to what precedes; and with a cautery over the liver, and another cautery over the melos of him with cautery clavih, and let the cautery remain open for some time, then cure it when it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	About cauterization of ulcers, here is the treatment for them.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you cut into an ulcer, then you should light the cautery that is similar to a ray.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Then insert that burning cautery into the ulcer that has been cut open, and hold your hand over it until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood comes.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And do this once or twice; if there are more ulcers, then cauterize each of them according to what we have recounted, and then cure those wounds with ointment until they are healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize with a large cautery on someone, it is better to do so later in the day.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter 36.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	About cauterization of fistulas that are made by nature in the parts of the body.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not obey the work which we have recounted in its place, and the patient is distressed by this, then let him be healed by cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Thus when someone sees a fistula in the nature of the body, and it is old, let him draw out the corruption from within and the corrupted moisture; and therefore what is most worthy to be done is to probe that with a thin needle, and then know the quantity of the depth of it by the previously mentioned probing.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Then light the cautery that is similar to a ray.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And then insert that burning cautery into this fistula according to the quantity in which you inserted the probe.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And repeat the cautery on that until those corrupted bodies are burnt one or two or three times, according to the quantity of your need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And beware of burning a nerve or vein; or if the fistula goes toward the cavity of the bladder or the cavity of the intestine, then beware of all those places; and do not do this unless the fistula is in a fleshy place and you think that it does not penetrate.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the place until it is healed.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the place is sealed and those matters have been cut out from it and remain thus for a long time, then know that it has been healed entirely.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if those matters are not removed from it, then know that it penetrates or in its preon the body is corrupted, or it falls because of those causes from which will come a recollection in its place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter 37.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	About cauterization of warts.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When in the warts there is pain from rubbing or from great windiness, and because of this the patient's body is worn down, then probe that with a needle on the warts with a cautery nail of which you will give the recollection.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And let them be cauterized very lightly by a small one under them, so that there will come three cauteries of linen, and then they will burn more later in the day.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter 38.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	About cauterization of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When there is weakness and softening of the bladder due to rubbing and moisture such that the patient cannot retain urine, then cauterize that in the part most below on the bladder, where the hairs of the pubic region begin, and cauterize with one cautery in the right part, and with another in the left part of it.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And let the length of each cautery be according to the amount of the hairs; and cauterize that with cautery in the lowest part of the back, or with two cauteries if it is necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And let the cautery nail be according to how it has proceeded.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter 39.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	About cauterization of the membrane.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When there is rubbing and moisture in the membrane, and because of this there is prohibited impregnation, and the menstrua of it are corrupted, and there is delayed provocation of them, and occurs pain due to the holding back of them, then let that location be cauterized with three cauteries in the circuit of the navel, as we have said in the cautery of the bladder; and let there be cautery over the lowest part of the back, or with two cauteries, and let the cautery nail be.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter 40.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	About cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When moist humors are spread in the part of the ankle, and there are made causes of the settling of its own place, and sign of it is that the thigh is prolonged over the other when compared between them.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the location of the dislocation is closed in where it bends.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Therefore let the patient be cauterized over the part of the ankle by the circle similar cautery, more than you will have probed with the needle in the circuit of the part as it is turned, and then that the part falls the middle location of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And let the cautery of which precedes be the form in the cauterization of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this cautery is not at hand, then cauterize that with three cauteries with great olive-shaped cauteries.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And let the cautery be done according to the quantity of the spiciness of all the cord; and then cure that until it is healed.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter 41.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	About cauterization of the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When there is pain in the part of the ankle and its cause is rubbing and moisture, and the patient is not cured by what we have said, and that is old, then let the patient be bled from gross humors by suppurating pills or artificial ones or similar; and then cauterize that.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And the manner of the cautery in that is according to two manners: or cautery with burning medicines, or cautery with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	Let them be according to two known manners, of which the one is that you cauterize that over the part of the ankle with three cauteries triangular according to this form; and make them good and deep.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And let the space be between each cautery the quantity of the thickness of the finger, and if the olive-shaped or large cautery, then let it be.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	Sometimes the cautery is over the middle location on the top of the ankle so that there are four cauteries.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you want, cauterize with the circle of which is preceded by the form in the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle, for that is a containing circle and burns the spiciness of all the cord.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the manner of cautery in sciatica when the pain is adherent to the ankle and it is not extended within to the thigh.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	But if it is extended within to the thigh, then cauterize that with two cauteries over the thigh on the location to which the patient feels the pain; and with one cautery over the ankle for four fingers a little beyond the hairy part.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if the cautery is with a blade, then let the depth of the cautery be according to the quantity of the spiciness of the cord.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the patient feels that the pain is extended within to the location close to the toes, then cauterize that where he feels it with cautery by three points or four or more if there is need of that.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the patient feels pain going from below to the thigh, then cauterize that there with a cautery with a blade.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And beware in all cauterization that you do not burn with the cautery until it burns nerve or great artery, and that through it is upon the patient harm or counteraction.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	I have seen one and another of those who cauterize on the ankle and finish in the cauterization, and the bed fire is inflated between which the tumor achieved the foot, and fire perforated and corrupted all the foot.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	Then the strong solution of vinegar, and here the death.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two parts, cauterize each one according to this manner.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And they said the wise some in cauterization of that cautery, of which this is the manner: make a circle of iron of which the circumference is half a palm; and its hole according to the thickness of a finger nail or less.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And within that circle is one third; and the space between them is the quantity of a nail of the toe; and those circles are open on both sides; and the length of those nails is a nail or two nails, and do in those edges of iron decently dressed in the circles; and this is its shape:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Then it is ignited in the fire until it turns red and throws sparks, and then it is placed on the part of the ankle, the patient lying on his side.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And so cauterize that with three round cauteries in a single sitting.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then let that be for three days; plaster that with a bandage and leave the wound open for several days; and then cure that with ointment until it is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Albucasis says: O sons, of this species of cautery we have used few for the terror of its custody, and because we have found few who guard it.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	But of the good cauteries, let him who suffers them find them and bring that to the place of him.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	But cautery with medicines burning is that you make two circles having perforated armor in which they lower the hammer of the door of iron; let the length of the parts in the nature of them be two nuts or nails those.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the space between them is the quantity of the thickness of the finger; and they are open below and above, and they are that contain themselves among themselves according to this form:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	And then pause on the part of the ankle the patient lying on his side, and press your hand over the part of the ankle; and then take water tail and pour it between two circles, and its quality be to the fire little by little, and bear that for the quantity of an hour, and let the patient bear the biting and the pressure of him — for that I found biting so with fire — until the biting ceases.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And then lift your hand with the instrument and wipe off the water tail from all of the ankle with warm water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And then let that be for three days and pause over that bandage until the darkness of the pressure remains blackened, and let that be for several days, and run from him pus; this is last in healing.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that with ointment until it is healed.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain is extended within the thigh or the leg, do to him statue in him that contains water according to how it is done in the ankle equally.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the manner of water tail, and I have already written that in the treatise on the rectification of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Receive from an alkali and a non-extinguished ash of both a half part one, and grind them and pause in a new wave of which the bottom part is perforated by a small hole, according to the quantity that goes into it.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And pause below the bottom of the other wave a wavy wave, and pour over that alkali and live ash of warm water the which covers those by a finger, and since you compress those with your hand for good compression, and let the wave that descends from him pour sharp water in the bottom part to the wavy wave.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And then adjust all that water, and pour it over another live ash and other renewed alkali, because that time-honored strong acrimony, which is administered in many operations of medicine and in cauterization of the other members, for an operation makes fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And from some medicines there are some which are cauterized widely, as with theriac and honey of anise and ash with soap, in which they are mixed.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And Gualia recorded from a man of the ancients the operation and the cure by which it is healed pain of ankle and sciatic vein, and magnified much good to him, and said that he did not need another cure, and that he was healed by one way so with bath and ice he has known from that.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And let it be taken from a certain green herb, and if it is not found green, let it be taken dry; and let it be ground with a little of grain and be paused over the ankle where there is pain, or in the thigh, or in the leg, and be bound.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And let it be left for the quantity of three hours or for the amount that the patient bears biting of the pressure.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And then put that in a bath and then when his body is heated, insert him into the sun, because the pain ceases and he is healed.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And know that there is no fear that anyone uses cauterization with these medicines unless it is the evacuation of the body.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	But Scorodius dried that when with goatskin the vein is stretched, let it be cauterized, draw him in oil, and be paused between the toes of the foot and between the toenails.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And then take dry goatskin and inflame it with fire until it is made charcoal; and then pause it over the wool and let it be left until it is cooled down.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And then repeat that, and do not cease doing that until the biting of the pressure comes to the ankle and eases the pain.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this manner of cauterization is called cauterization of cows.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter .xlii.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	Of cauterization of pain in two.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Some pains are in the back for many causes, as with inflammation or with piercing or with excessive evacuation, and for causes like those similar, with infusion of matter rubbed and moistened.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And cauterize not except in this single species which is made by infusion of matter rubbed.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore know, then evacuation of the patient is with pills formed and like them, which are formed on the back in which there is pain three lines according to the breadth of him, because you have ten in each line cauteries or maybe, according to the quantity that sees of the tolerance of the patient and of his strength.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And let cauterization be made by point cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, cauterize with three cauteries or with four to cautery nail medial according to this form:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter .xliii.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	Of cauterization in the beginning of gout.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Many times this maladie occurs to small children; and sign of the beginning of it in children is that they occur on them constriction in the armpit, in the elevation and the movement.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And they atrode in the last vertebra of the back and of the nails of him that already begins to rise over the other vertebrae.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And then when you see that and want to prohibit, let it be cauterized by cautery which is circle according to this form:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	that take the cautery over all part of the vertebra equally.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you wish, cauterize around the spine with a pointed cautery two or three times.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	Let the points be close to each other.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	Then treat the wound within so that it heals with what we have said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	But be careful that cautery is not administered on any swelling caused by a nerve spasm.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 44.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	Of cauterization for gout and joint pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And thus when gout from cold is cured with a method of cure and the pains are not reduced, then apply cautery.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And you should cauterize that area around the joint on the foot with a hot cautery tool.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let the cautery be olive oil, of which this is its form:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pains spread within the joints or other joints, and it becomes swollen, then cauterize that on each swollen joint with three cauteries or four, all around, with this cautery of olive oil.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if you need to use the pointed cautery tool, then cauterize it and do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery beforehand, but just stroke around the edge of the joint gently.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pains spread within both joints, then administer the cautery we have described in its chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pains are only in the fingers and it is called sciatica, then puncture around the circles of the nails as they turn, puncture them in two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if the pains remain in the fingers, then puncture around the circles of the nails on each finger and on the palm of the hand.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pains spread for several days in the joints or muscles, then cauterize each of them all around.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And do not discharge the patient from good treatment and the reception of medicines, for if good treatment is given and the inflammation is discharged with this cautery it will heal, God helping.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 45.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	Of cauterization for breaks.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When a break occurs in the angles and tears the intestines before the skin of the abdomen, and it begins to happen, then you should order the patient to stop eating for his day and to use laxatives so that the tear falls from his belly.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	Then follow the patient around with your hand on his head, and command him to keep his back straight so that the area between his shoulders is stretched or the intestines or hernia appear.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	Then return it with your fingers and point at the break over the bone of the elbow with the tip of which is similar to the upper part of a circle on the upper parts of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Then heat the cautery tool, of which this is its form:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	until it becomes red and warm.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	Then hold the cautery tool over that and press with your hand with the cautery tool standing straight, and hold it there until you feel the bone of the elbow enter into the hollow of the forearm; and repeat with another application if you have not achieved it in the first application over the bone.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	And observe wisely the movement of the intestine at the time of your cauterization, so that you do not burn the intestine so that over the patient it does not come to death or another great malice.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And know that when you with the cautery do not touch the bone, do not continue your operation.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And see to it that the cautery for children is subtle according to their size and age.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	Then cure the area of the cautery for three days with wine until the scar of the fire is healed.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then cure it with other ointments until it is healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And let the patient lie on his back for 40 days while the place is sealed and bandaged.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And see to it that you stop his nourishment according to the length of time of his cure which is loosening the skin of his belly and so that the intestine does not come out through the effort of healing.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And when he wants to be raised after 40 days, then administer to him a gentle lifting, and keep it for another 40 days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And let him be idle from work and the filling of food and drink, and from violent movements, for when he uses this method of healing entirely it will heal.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And he will direct the cure of breaks in other parts of the belly, and so at the beginning, and you want him not to be bent, then cauterize that break with a red hot cautery tool according to its size; and cure it with what we have said, and do not touch it.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And now some first ones say that the break should be cauterized with a triangular cautery tool according to this form, because it is pointed at the tip:
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	and it is placed a line that passes through the breadth at the top of the break, and another line above it; and holding your hand with an iron cautery tool, but the first cautery is gentler and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	Of cauterization for torsion.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When a pain occurs in any member through compression or concussion and that pain persists for a long time and is not relieved by medicine, then see to it that you cauterize with a pointed cautery tool.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And let the cautery be of all members according to its magnitude and smallness, and nature and development of it, and location of torsion and pain of it.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	So if it is healed by the first cautery, well; and if not, then repeat the cautery on it; for usually those pains are punctured in the member near which it is, so that you know them by the cautery on the patient when he is healed.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	Of cauterization for leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Lepers some times with cautery for great benefit, and to clean the leprosy which is made by putrefaction of blood and of melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And so when you want to cauterize it, consider whether the leprosy is putrid and as that which has been healed with what we have said in the division and not decomposed, nor this, and pay attention to the patient that the corruption includes all of his body and all of its complecion, then cauterize it on the head with an iron cautery tool: one in the middle place of the head, and one below it, raise the forehead towards the ears; and both over two horns, and one behind, on the nape or neck.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And then your hand with the cautery tool a little while it presses in the bone a small impression, and from it are displaced the scabs so that the expiration of thick vapors is eased from him; and cauterize over the ulser according to what follows.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	If leprosy has already spread over the patient's body and appears visibly, then you should cauterize it with the cauteries we mentioned earlier; and apply a cautery to the end of the nose, two cauteries on each elbow, two cauteries on the two spinal columns of the neck, six cauteries on the spinal columns of the back, one large cautery on the spinal column near the waist, one on the waist, two on the hips, one on each hip, two on the knees, one on each knee, two on the ankles, and two on the muscles; and cauterize all the joints of the hands and feet, as well as each heel, and the soles of the feet.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And be careful not to burn the nerves that are on the heel.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	And sometimes a cautery is applied on the bone of the little finger, and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And know that the more you apply cauteries, the more beneficial and effective they are; and know that the patient feels no pain from the cautery, just as with the fingers, because his body is already numbed.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And you should make the cauteries large or small according to the size of the members and joints, as mentioned earlier in the tools section.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then heal the wound with flour made from roasted bran mixed with honey and other healing remedies until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48:
De cauterizacio de stupor.	On cautery for stupor:
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When a member is paralyzed or asleep and is not healed by medicines, oils, and plasters, then you should cauterize that paralyzed member with cauteries according to the size of the member or its smallness.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And let your cautery pierce the thickness of the skin by a little bit.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then heal it with ointment until it is healed.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And sometimes there is cauterized a stupor that comes from the hands and feet, and spinal columns of the back, and you can see the movement of the nerves that move that member, and the stupor is removed.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	Do not presume to do this unless you are skilled in anatomy of the members and the exit of the nerves that move throughout the body.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49:
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	On cautery for leukoderma:
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When leukoderma is old and does not respond to any of the healing remedies, then you should cauterize it with a cautery lightly according to the thickness of the skin so that the white and color of it are changed, and its color is altered.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	Then heal it with flour made from roasted bran and lentils, rose oil, and leaves of wild rosemary, and pigeon's blood or dove's blood; let each be a portion and all be mixed together; then have a cloth laid over the area so that it is healed.
Capitol .l.	Chapter 50:
De cauterizacio de cranc.	On cautery for cancer:
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When a cancer begins and you want it to stop growing, then cauterize it with a circular cautery around its circumference as it is turned over.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And the wise say that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle of it; but I have not seen this, for I am afraid that it would ulcerate, and I have seen this happen some times.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And it is more proper that it be cauterized around its circumference with a circle as we have said, or with many cauteries.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 51:
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	On cautery for inflammation:
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When an inflammation is delayed in ripening, and it is delayed because of the superfluity that produces it, or because of the state of the patient for whom it is, whether he is old and decrepit, of little blood, or because of the time, and you want to hasten its ripening; then cauterize around its circumference with many small puncturing cauteries; then let it be left so that it will hasten in ripening.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	But if you want to pierce it with a cautery, then you should heat the cautery of which this is the shape of it: and place it in the middle of the inflammation so that it penetrates the skin.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the cautery is in that place that is more below, so that the arm's body is removed; then heal it until it is healed.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 52:
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	On cautery for corrosion:
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corrosion is a decaying that walks in the member, which corrodes it as fire eats dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore, if you see this corrosion in a place that can suffer cautery by fire, then you should heat small nail-like cauteries, and large ones according to what is convenient in that place where the corrosion is.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	Then cauterize it entirely so that you eradicate all of the corrosion and not leave any cause for it to return.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	Then let him lie for three days, and place over the cauterized places a poultice moistened with mixed oil so that the scars are entirely eradicated and all of the corrosion.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	Then heal it with flesh-generating ointments.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	But if after three days the flesh does not grow and is not healed, then it is good; but if not, then repeat the cautery over it where it is rotted in the corrupted places.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And corrosion is treated some times with sharp medicine because that is the middle place of cautery.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	But cautery by fire is the most powerful healing.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And I have already said the healing of it with sharp medicine in division; therefore take that when you see its growth in effect.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 53:
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	On cautery for warts and other similar growths:
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Many times warts grow under the feet of an old person who is called a claw, and it is a serious cause, deep-rooted, which pierces the foot; and cautery for these is according to two manners: cautery by fire, and cautery by hot water.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	But cautery by fire is that you ignite the cautery needle-like and similar to a penny nail, which should be made of iron according to the quantity that contains the claw entirely, and it should have slender edges.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	Then place that ignited one over the claw, and then turn your hand with the cautery around the circumference of the claw so that the cautery reaches the depth of the claw.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	Let him lie for three days until he begins to move his arm.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	Then poultice that with wild mallows bruised with salt, and place the poultice over that for one night, for that will eradicate it from its roots.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	Then heal the wound with flesh-generating ointment until it is healed.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if it does not become converted, and sometimes it accedes in the surface of the body, mostly in the hands and feet, then you should administer in those cauteries with hot water, and it is that you take a quail of lead or of iron or of a penny needle, and place that over the claw; and then let him get in the quail of hot water little by little, and hold your hand, and you turn that around with all your strength, and push the needle of the hot water into the depth of the claw, and wait for the patient for an hour, and then remove that, for the claw will have been eradicated from its roots.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And thus they come to those within whom they enter, one after the other throughout their body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	Then cure the sores that are caused by the roots of the claws, which are eradicated with ointments which the flesh engenders.
Capitol .liiii.	Chapter IV.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	Of cautery for trembling.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When you have a tremor from friction on the nerve or from fever caused by friction, or from another similar cause, then you should cauterize that with four cauteries or with five cauteries, between each vertebra with one cautery; and do cauterization on his feet, and over his stomach, with an olive-oil cautery.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the trembling of him will cease and the sickness from friction will be healed quickly.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter L.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	Of cautery for white spots on the body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When white spots appear on the body, and pustules are split open, which are caused by thick corrupted matter; therefore at the beginning when they first appear, they should be cauterized over the head of the fistula with a subtle cautery made from myrtle wood, the end of which is heated; or with a long-stemmed erysipelas root cautery; or with a lenticular cautery.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And sometimes it is cauterized with alum at the beginning of its eruption according to this way; and they are not cracked, and the superfluity is broken up by doing this, and healed.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	But it should be done with an evacuation through phlebotomy.
Capitol lvi.	Chapter VI.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	Of cautery for bleeding from a wound caused by cutting the artery.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Sometimes bleeding occurs from an artery which is cut beneath the plague, or beneath the incision of an ulcer or cautery on a limb, and it is difficult to stop that.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Therefore when this happens to someone, you should close it with your hand over the opening of the artery, and place your thumb over that place, and press it tightly with your fingers so that the flow of blood is stopped under your thumb, and it does not come out.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	Then place on the fire the olive-oil cauteries, a few and large, several times, and blow over them so that they are set alight.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And then take one of those small or large according to the site and the plague in which the artery is broken, over that vein quickly so that you have stopped the flow of blood with your thumb, and do cautery on it until it is bound and restricted.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the blood flows from the opening of the artery when you release your thumb and loosen the cautery, then take another cautery which has been prepared in the fire, and do this repeatedly until the blood is restricted.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And be careful that you do not burn the nerve which is here, and that it does not come upon the patient any other harm.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to restrict the blood in those except by one of four ways: or by cautery as we have said, or by extraction if it is not extracted, for when it is extracted its extremities are burnt and the blood is restricted; or that it be bound with a ligature or with a bandage by strong constriction, or that medicines which have the virtue to restrict the blood be placed upon him and bound with a compress by decent constriction.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	But he who administers decent restriction of him with a bandage and constriction with cloth or by position of causes burning and similar, does not confer but tar.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	But if this happens to someone and the doctor is not present nor medicine, then open by placing your thumb over the opening of that vein as we have said, and understand at the great constriction of him until the blood is stopped from the principal part of the plague; and on the artery let there be no flow of blood; and from the artery sprinkle with water rubbed with something greatly rubbing until the blood is congealed and thickened; and unless cautery or medicine is necessary.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Begins the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Of incision, and puncturing, and opening, and phlebotomy, and of plagues and their equivalents.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are the words of Albucasis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have already said in the first chapter all sickness which is appropriate with cautery and with burning medicine, and their occasions and causes, and the instruments in which they are necessary and the forms of the cauteries; and we have ordered the chapters from the upper part of the head to the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And now we will go through that medical way so that it may be lightened for the patient, then upon that which he has demanded.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And before we begin that, know that in this chapter it is for terror that which is in the first chapter of cautery.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And be careful that it is in him great caution, for in the operation which is in this chapter many times there is a certain evacuation which is with blood through which life is lost by aspersing the vein or incision on the ulcer or opening of an abscess or purification of a plague or extraction of arrow or incision of stone and their equivalents.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And from all these accompany fear and trembling and in the mass of them death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I warn you that this does not fall upon you in which there is hesitation, for some times case happens to men by many ways of sickness.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And of them some are sent away by their sickness and is the weakness because of it that signifies death; and for the length of his sickness and by the sickness itself, and it is fear which means death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And of those is who gives to you his son or daughter, you expecting from him health, and his sickness is hurtful.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And therefore do not consent to anyone who comes to you in this way; and your caution be greater than naivety and your greediness; and do not presume any cause upon that unless proper certain science which verifies that for you, and to whom is possible laudable success.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And use in the cure of all your sicknesses from prediction and indication of him to whom health is converted; for in him there is help concerning acquisition of fame and memory, praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	O sons, God inspires you understanding and do not turn away from you direction and protection; for it is in his hand.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have ordered this chapter distinguishing by chapters according to what precedes in the chapter of cauteries, from the cure of the head to the feet, so that it may be lightened for you that which you demanded and of which you have need.
Capitol primier.	First Chapter.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	Of the cure of water which is contained in the heads of children.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	Know that this sickness sometimes happens to children because of pregnancy and when the nurse tightens the head of the infant she feels it.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And some times by hidden cause which is not known.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	But I have not seen this sickness except in children; and to all those whom I have seen it happens death, and for this I have seen evident work in them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I have seen that one child whose head was of water, and his head was always magnified so that nurse could not lift him up by the size of his head; and but that humidity was increased within which fire caused death.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	This moisture or is aggregated between the tendon and bone, or is aggregated below the bone on the head.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	Because the operation in that if the moisture is between the tendon and the bone and the ulcer is small, then cover what you split in the middle of the head with a poultice in the width, and let the length of the poultice be six digits between which the moisture runs, and this is the form of the spatula:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And therefore if the moisture is more increased and the ulcer is larger, then there are here two slits according to this manner:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the moisture is below the bone, its sign is that you see the edges of the head opened wide and the water is squeezed out when you compress that with your hand to the openings inside, and it is not hidden from you.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	Cover what you split in the middle of the head with three slits according to this manner:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	and then extract all the moisture; and then strengthen the slits with bandages and plasters; and then anoint it from above with wine and oil on the fifth day, and then loosen the bandage and heal the wound with ointments and dressings, and strengthen the head with equality; and feed the patient with dry food of little moisture until the member is comforted and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And there is another manner of incision, which considers where the magnitude of the ulcer and the collection of water appear, for some appear more in the occipital region, or in the front part, or on the right side, or on the left; and therefore pay attention to the incision where the ulcer appears and the collection of water, and do it according to how you consider it most possible.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that you do not cut the artery and cause a flow of blood and kill the patient through that flow of blood by the evacuation of moisture.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter II.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	Of the incision of the arteries which are near the ears, called auricles.
Capitol segon.	Chapter II.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When there is a catarrh or swelling in the ears or the feet, and it is ancient, and there is no response to the treatment of medicines, then the last treatment for this is the incision of those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And therefore cover when you want to cut those which the patient's head passes through, and then wipe the place with a rough cloth so that the arteries appear, and then be bound around the neck of the patient with some cloth; and then consider where the pulse is; and the places of each over the places which are near the ears pressed down, and they are hidden except in some people.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And then mark on the artery with a tent, and then cut each one with the spatula of each part made with an incision penetrating into the bone, and let it be through the width of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you want, insert the spatula below the artery and pierce that to the parts beneath, and those above are incident to the parts above.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And let the length of the incision be six digits apart, for when any vein is cut the blood flows out with a pulsating egress, and that salt jumps out frequently.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	But if the artery does not appear to the pulse, then cover from the auricle the quantity of the space of three digits, and then mark with tent, and do it penetrating into the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And that which comes out of the blood is quantity of wine ounce. and strongly he comes out of him more or less, and all that is according to the quantity which appears from the virtue of the patient and the collection of the artery from him.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then consider the wound, and therefore if any cause of the head remains on the bone, then cut it so that no cauterized ulcer comes from it.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen the wound with plasters and with bandages of linen cloth, and then heal that with ointments until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	Of the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When to someone there happens migrain ancient or catarrhs caused, by humoral avarice and by quality in the lacerts of the temples, or ancient fever violent and similar to those, and is medicated with the manners of healing of medicine and that does not respond, then we have shown in these illnesses extraction of the arteries in the temples, or cauterization of those also as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the manner of the operation and extraction of those is that the patient passes through the temples; and understand the artery which appears in the temple because it is shown to you by its pulse, and it is hidden except in few people by strength of wiping.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden from you, then be bound around the neck of the patient with some cloth; and then wipe the place with a rough cloth or evaporate the place with hot water until you appear to you the artery manifestly.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then you take the spatula of which this is the form:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then you scrape the tendon with that with ease until you come to the artery; and then cut in it and extract it into the parts above until you extract it from the tendon and discover it from the tunics which are below it, of all parts.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	But if the artery is slender, then wrap that with the tip of the finger, and then cut one part according to the quantity by which they are lengthened and shortened, and there will not be a flow of blood, for if they are not cut the blood cannot flow out at all.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And then evacuate the blood of wine ounce. into three.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the artery is large, then cover that in two places with strong woolen felt or cords on length, and do not cut to it putrefaction before the consolidation of the wound and let there be a flow of blood.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And then cut the superfluity which is between two bandages; and do that in that hour or another hour.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you want, cauterize that with cautery into the bone with cautery knife within which they are cut the ends of it, and be in place of that meteyssa work.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it is better work unless the patient has fever or is of heated complexions, for cautery is of those causes that help the ending humors, and therefore is better in youth.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then cover the extraction of the arteries that appear to the place of ancient ulcer, and be laid upon it powders made decently, and then let it be healed with dry medicines making a poultice and with hot water until it is healed.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if while you work another view happens to flow of blood from the artery, then you tie that blood, or with cautery, or scrape the place of ulcer, and strengthen your hand within until it is restricted the blood.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if any cause of those is not to you present, then pause your finger on the place within which the blood is coagulated, and moisten the place with hot water of violent frictions until the keenness rests, and be bound according to how it is covered.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And that which is pus earlier in the extraction of artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two points, because you have marked the two places with tent, and removed each other, burning fire, within which they come to the bone and cut the vein in two places so that it is elongated that which is between the ends of it, for they are not consolidated at all with this cautery.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the shape of the cautery instrument:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	The sharpness of both ends should be the same.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	However, if one end is slightly sharper than the other, it's better, for when both ends are close to each other and not pressing into the flesh with great force.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	So, if there is any thickness in those areas, the heat of the fire should be held there and the flesh should be cut away gently.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this is better than all other operations and less painful.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And the distance between the two ends should be equal to the thickness of a finger.
Capitol quart.	Chapter four:
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	On the treatment of acute and acidic wounds in the bowels.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When they are acidic wounds and the source is veins that are above the forehead, and there is no cause for the cure with medicine, and you see the patient's face becoming red and feeling crawling like ants in his forehead, and his bowels are weakened, moistened in such a way that their skin is known to be familiar with it, and the eyelids are burned by the acidity of the tears, the old ones apply a cure with a sponge.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And you command the patient to scratch the skin on his forehead, and then gently insert into his forehead three parallel incisions according to the length of his forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the incision is two fingers: the first incision should be equally distant according to the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a little less than the movement of the tears that are in the tear gland, and the third from the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And be careful of the incisions on both sides, and extend your hand from the continuation of both mandibles.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	If the space between each incision is equal to three fingers side by side.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a sponge apparatus or dry rags with which to stop the bleeding.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And then insert the spatula from both acute ends, of which this is the shape of the incision of it:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	that is from the start of the temples into the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Excavate with it all the flesh that is between two incisions, using the skull as a guide which is above the bone, and then do the same with the middle incision into the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And then press it with this spatula and insert into the first incision again, but this time with another instrument called a cutlass, sharp on one side and blunt on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And press the sharp side of it against the flesh attached to the bone, and the other side against the bone, and insert it into the middle incision, and cut away with it all the vessels that descend from the head to the bowels.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	But let the incision continue until it reaches the bone, and then do the same with the middle incision into the other incision.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And then when the blood flows in equal quantity, squeeze out the places of the clotted blood.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then place in each incision a piece of old cotton wool, and place over them powders mixed with wine and oil and sour wine, so that no pus develops into an ulcer.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day loosen the bandages and administer copious fomentations of warm water or tea, and then cure it with basilicon ointment made with rose oil and others so that the wounds are healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter five:
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	On the treatment of wounds by cauteries and bowels descending from the parts inside the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When to someone come cauteries and continuant, and you see the bowels of the patient weakened small, and then the guarding of them is debilitated, and the eyelids are ulcerated and their skin is blackened, and in the temple of the head there is acute pain and consequent tension, then understand from these accidents that the matters and cauteries do not come except from certain veins proceeding from inside.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best cure for these is this: command the patient to raise his forehead, and then insert into it an incision in the middle of the forehead, a little by the width (and begin with the incision of the left temple into the right temple; and let the incision be into the bone; and extend your hand from the tears of the temples which are hurt because of chewing), so that the bone is uncovered.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry up all the blood with a sponge or dry cloth, and then stuff between the two lips of the incision with old cotton wool or dry lint.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then press upon it powders mixed with wine and oil, so that no pus develops into an ulcer.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you remove it and see that the ulcer has diminished, then know that the friction of the bone caused it to come out, and then cure it with an astringent remedy which makes the flesh come out, as if you take flour from wheat two parts and gum four parts and mix them, and from this make a plaster and apply it to these wounds of the flesh.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter six:
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	On the treatment of what bites in the ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	The whole cause that bites in the ears is one of four species, for it is either mineral stone or similar to stone like iron and glass, or it is plant as if it were chervil or bean, or it is volatile cause as water and sour wine and their likes.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And then when stone bites in the ear or another cause like those causes that do not increase in the ear, and put the ear to the sun, and if you see the stone, then distill into it some cause of violets oil or sesame, and then administer its extract, and make him sneeze with medicine, and dry up his nose because of sneezing.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And then put around the ear some pieces of cloth or wool, and extend the ear to its sides, for many times it is torn by these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not torn, then administer its extract with the instrument called extremely subtle curved forceps, of which this is the shape:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it is torn by gesti, let it be; and if not, then administer its extract with a very subtle sharp pair of forceps.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And then if it is not torn by that, make a tube of iron and insert the end of the tube into the hole of the ear and close the opening of the tube with wax and with softened oil so that nothing comes out except the tube.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And then extract it with a strong pull, for often things are pulled along with it which we have encountered before.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	But if it is not torn in this way, take holly ash or of venice alumbak, by which the ears are pressed a little quantity, and put that on the end of the ray, and then wrap around it a decent amount of bandage.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And then insert that into the hole of the ear with ease, and then dry up the ear from moisture.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And then if it is not torn by all the causes which we have recounted, then you cut to such an extent that which comes out ulcer or spasm.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the way to cut it is that you first draw the blood of the patient from the vein sephasic and extract the blood according to the manner of the nature of it, and then do it cescere between your hands and turn the ear to its sides, and open a little fissure in the root of the ear because of the grey matter in the place where it is premeditated by you.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And let the incision be made in the shape of a moon so that it reaches the stone, and when the stone is found, obstruct it with instruments if possible; and then close the incision quickly at that time, and cure the wound until it is healed.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause of the pain in the ear is a growth that has grown and become inflated, then administer treatment and extract it; but if it does not obey you on its own, then take a thin spatula according to this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	and administer to it the incision of that growth which has fallen into the ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not do this when you think that it has already been moistened by the vapor of the ear, and put it in a few drops, and extract it from those with tweezers or with a subtle gesture, or with an incision as we have said, for the extraction of it is eased.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	But with the water which has entered the ear, let the patient sneeze with the intention of causing it to come out at the beginning, and fill his ear with some old cotton, and spit upon that ear in which is the water, and if by this means it is expelled, well; and if not, take some thin stones and heat them according to the length of the finger, and warm those in the fire a little, and let the patient insert one of those into the hole of his ear and suck on it with another stone over the stone which is within the ear.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Therefore, do not cease this until all the water is expelled.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc .i., e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And when the water has been expelled in that way that you took from paper or from a cloth, take one end of it and insert it into the ear and extend the other end with fire until its middle is burned.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	Then insert another cloth and do this as many times until all the water is expelled, and use that with a cannula as it has been said about the stone extractor.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	But in the extraction of an insect that has entered the ear, if it is small, use the same as we have said about the stone; but if it is a large thing that causes the pain in the ear, then administer its extraction with tools and tweezers, and the cause of this is pus more than all other causes that enter the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	But in the extraction of a worm generated in the ear, when you are treating it with what we have said in the division and in the treatise on distillation and you do not find your treatment effective, then look at the ear towards the sun.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And so if you see any cause of the worm, then extract it with tools or with subtle tweezers; but if you do not see any cause, then take a cannula below which is narrow and above which is ample, and this is its form:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And insert the slender end into the ear according to the amount which the patient can endure; and then suck it with a strong suction, and do this several times until all the worms are expelled.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	But if it does not obey you on its own, then plug and close the circuit of the cannula with wax as we have said; then administer distillation which the ancients have already tried in the treatment of worms, and find this in the treatise on distillation.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let your effusion with which you pour the medical oils into the ear be with this instrument of which this is the form:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And make it of silver or brass, below which is narrow and above which is flat.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And so it is with the embossing that it is in the cavity of the cannula from which what is necessary will be contained.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you want, take the rod and wrap it in a cloth at its slender end, and then pour oil into the cavity of the instrument or suck juice from some herb, or anything that you want from these medicines into the cannula — and this is in the ear — and then insert the rod with a cloth above and squeeze it with your hand that compressed it until the oil is expelled into the cavity of the instrument and the patient feels the oil inside.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And what has been put in the ear shall already be warmed by fire a little.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And beware that the cause which you distill in the ear is not too hot, for the medicines of the ear do not endure that.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter 7
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	Of the treatment of the inflammation of ears.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Some children are born with hernias from the bellies of their mothers, and this happens in some men; inflammation in the middle of the ear is caused by a hernia or by some wound to that part, and sometimes it is in the openings of the holes.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And what happens in the middle, which does not include the pain, is in the most difficult dispositions to heal.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in that in which you find the pain, look at the ear of the patient towards the sun.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And so if you see swelling apparent, open it with a subtle spatula of which this is the form:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If its end in which the breadth is small, of which one part is acute and the other not, and let the spatula be of two sides smooth so that it does not hurt the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And if the inflammation is from flesh grown in the ear or in the middle of it, then open it with subtle tweezers and cut that vigourously until all the flesh is expelled.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the inflammation is in the preon of the ear, then take a slender rod and warm it by fire a little, and then insert that into the middle of the ear.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And so if you have seen swelling with what the patient feels with ease because of the weight, relieve the pressure on it with ease; and beware that you do not hurt the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then put on the ear a piece of linen according to the size of the opening which you have wrapped in Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure of the hardening of the swelling; or take some and moisten it with water and sprinkle that over it, having threshed and used it; and if you see the ear already puffed up, then pull off that linen and replace it with another which you wrap in cerote made from oil of roses, until the swelling is reduced; and then treat it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	But if bleeding happens, then soak sponge or linen in warm water and place it over the ear, and use the other treatment which constricts the flow of blood, which is said in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 8
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	Of the treatment of itchiness that comes to the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Athezil which comes to the eyelids of eyes some time moist, sometimes dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Therefore take those with tweezers or with a spatula, and split them with the tip of your knife, and then place it over the spots having threshed it.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	But if pain with flow of blood comes, then cauterize those with a small, subtle cautery.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cauterization is when the splits and wounds return no more after some cause has been removed from their tips; and when they are cauterized by fire, those tips are burned and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Treatment for the swelling that comes to the eyelids of the eyes.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Sometimes there is a swelling in the eyelids of the eyes due to some cause that resembles a growth in strength and hardness, and because of this swelling it is called a growth.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And it is the accumulation of thick humidity in the eyelid, both above and below.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Therefore, the treatment for these is that one should consider whether the swelling comes from something external to the eyelid and is swollen throughout; and the cause of this is le پرخورة.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Therefore, open a slit in that place according to its width, and carefully scrape it throughout to allow the humor to escape; then suspend it with thread and tie it off.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	But if you are not prepared for the incision into it except by penetrating the eyelid little by little, then this is not noticed in any cause.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the growth is large, then adjust it with a stitch; and treat that until it is healed.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is small, you will not suffer harm from it because the oil of the eye restores and heals it.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the swelling is inclining towards the inner parts of the eyelid, then open the eyelid and suspend the growth with thread, another that you prepare for incision, and press it from all sides, and if the eyelid is extended by incision, then this does not matter in any cause.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And you can open with a slit of width and an incision throughout the eyelid, and the hot humor escaping through the nature of the eye; but if the tension is general in the eyelid so that the humor cannot escape through the nature of the eye except by incision, then make the incision, wash the eye with salted water, and treat the place until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	Of the treatment of a circle in the eyelid above the eye.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	A circle is a gray thing which is engendered in the tunics of the eyelid above, and mainly in infants, it harms those eyes and adds to their catarrh; and they cannot look at the brightness of the sun because of that which causes them to weep.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And because the hot humor cannot escape through the nature of the eye except by incision and if it causes general tension in the eyelid, open the eyelid with a slit of width and scrape it throughout to allow the hot humor to escape.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And there is another method of treatment for that in which the patient rests his head on you, and then he covers himself with a cloth and makes heat, and makes a circle according to the amount which contains arthernach throughout, and then he puts that on it and presses with his hands so that the catarrh is collected in the middle of the circle, and then open in the middle of that humid place with a spatula by making an incision through the width, and the incision should not be larger than the incision made in phlebótomy.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	But in the previous case, split the cord all the way until you reach the catarrh, for in most cases, catarrh is reached through the incision according to the form of whitened gray matter.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Therefore, extract it with pieces of cloth which you have wrapped between your fingers to the outside parts and revolve it between the right and left hand until it is dispersed.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And beware that you do not insert in the incision so that with the spatula, you do not reach the eye and scrape it.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	But if you do not see catarrh at the beginning of the incision, but you insert a little with ease so that it processes catarrh; and then extract it as we have said before, and then moisten the cloth in water and wine and place them on the place and bind those tightly.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And if someone has torn salt and places it in the cavity of the incision so that what remains of that humidity.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that until it is healed.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	But if pus occurs in the place of the vein, then treat that with soft bandages until it is healed.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	Of the treatment of a circle in the eyelid below the eye.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When in the eyelids of the eyes, the natural hairs are born under the skin and are old, then those cause illness to the eye and lead to conditions of illness such as constant tears and softening of the eyelids and the membrane beneath them, which is a cause of destruction of the eye called tactinir of the eye, and it is cured in four ways: either by cautery with fire; or with sharp medicine as previously said in the chapter on cautery; or tactinir is caused by incision and suturing; or by cannas as I will say.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And then you will place the head of the patient towards you; lift the eyelid of the eye with your left hand, and if it is lifted, that is good; and if not, insert a needle into that part where there is pus below the eyelid, and push the needle with the pus upwards towards the margin of the eyelid near where the hairs are born, and pull the pus to the top with the eyelid, and release it.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And then probe inside the eyelid below the hairs with a spatulate instrument into the tear duct where it joins the major lacrimal canal and enters the minor lacrimal canal; then extract the pus and place a small piece of cotton or cloth underneath the eyelid, and sign on the eyelid with a tent, forming a shape like a tail fin.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	However, the shape should be according to the amount of swelling in the eyelid, because this varies among people; some require that a large quantity be cut out from the eyelid according to the amount by which it is softened.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And then probe with the spatulate instrument along the two lines you have marked, beginning at where the major lacrimal canal joins the minor lacrimal canal.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your incision is close to the natural hairs according to the thickness of the membrane, it is good.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And then place the probe in one of the two corners of the pouch, and scrape away the entire lining, and with a thread or fine wool, stitch together the two lips, and clean the blood, and adhere what is superfluous of the membranes above the eyelids by applying some viscous substance, if you wish to do so, and if not, don't cure it.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And then let the stitching of the membranes be for three or four days, and then cure it.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you want, let the poultice be unsutured, and cure it with something that dries and constricts, because the eyelid is raised due to the sealing of the poultice and the addition of heat; but stitching is better. And so I have said about tactinir.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	However, there should be diligence in performing it on the patient, and it is a good operation without fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	There is another method for tactinir, which is to mark the shape of a tail fin on the eyelid, and then lift the eyelid with three hooks separated and gathered together according to this shape:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	But if that is not possible, and the hooks are not available, then take a needle with thread and insert it at the center of the figure, and push the other end near the major lacrimal canal, and the other end near the minor lacrimal canal, and gather between your fingers the membranes with equality, and then with them, lift up your hand with equal elevation, lifting up all of the pouch which has been marked as we have recommended.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then stitch together the two lips of the pouch and cure it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	But if pus occurs due to your incision or probing, treat that pustule with ceronium and similar substances, and with ointment.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And sometimes it happens that the eyelids turn inwards, so then you should use what we have said about incision; but stitching in each case is more artificial.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	Tactinir with cannas is according to this form:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	And it is that you convert the eyelid and split the figure inside according to what I have described; and then with skill, make two cannas or two thin rods whose length is according to the length of the eyelid and whose breadth is less than the breadth of the spatulate instrument.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have already cut at the ends of some parts where you hold the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Then gather each one with subtlety beneath what is superfluous of the eyelid of the eye, and tightly constrict the cannas in some parts with strong compression, and leave it for several days; because the pouch will die and become black and rot away, and when it falls, it will push itself out.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	But if it is delayed, then break it with tongs, and cure the pouch until it is healed.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	And so when it is solidified, the eyelid is lifted and the hairs do not prick.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the form of two cannas which you will make according to this form:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and have the quantity of length and breadth neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter 12.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	Of the elevation of hairs pricking in the eye with a needle when the hair is hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When there are non-natural hairs, hard and rough and pricking the eyes, then the operation on it is that you take a thin needle and place in it thread of fine silk, and then you gather its ends and twist them in a most subtle manner.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And let the length of the hairs be the quantity of a palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And then you compose another thin thread under it in a short manner, and twist its ends if you wish to do so.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And then place the patient's head towards you, and let it be near the sunlight so that your work is seen clearly, because it is a subtle and delicate operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And then insert the needle at the root of the hair which needs skill, and make it penetrate the eyelid quickly while extracting that above the natural hair.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And then pull the hair out from under it and insert it into the eye, and let there be one or two or three hairs at most and not more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And then pull your hand out with it so that the hair is extracted with the natural hair.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	But if it is pulled out with the thread and the hair is not extracted, then pull out the thread from its parts under the hair which you have composed with that thread, so that when it is pulled out from above, the hair will be extracted with it.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And then examine it with the sight of the eye, because when you pull out the thread and the hair, and it does not stick to the membrane, the eye will be clear, and the clause will go away in two or three days, and the hair will adhere to its place and grow well on it.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if the hair is longer, then you gather a long hair of the natural hairs, and elevate it with that, or let the one which you have gathered be elevated with it so that it is stretched out and you elevate it.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter 13.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	Of the cure of a hemorrhoid which appears in the eyelid above it.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When there is a hemorrhoid in the eye, and it is a contraction of the eyelid when it is contracted on one side or the other, from bad healing of membrane or from incisions or cauterization, and it is called leporina, and this inflammation or is natural or accidental, and it is caused by healing of membrane or from incisions or cauterization, or from similar things to their sick ones.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The manner of the operation on it is that you split that consolidation and separate its lips, and place in it a piece of linen thread, and gather those so that they are healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And it is necessary that you use a dressing for him from the causes which dry out; for if you do this, it will return in a worse condition than it was before.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use in that which causes softening, such as fenugreek, and steep it in the water in which there are alder wood and seeds, or aquilon ointment, which should be liquefied with one of the oils, and soak the limb in it, and cure it with that.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the secret to your treatment is that you should not pierce anything which has not consolidated according to its original form.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation which we have described is merely a correction of the ehalixacratis which does not return the shape of the location according to how it was before.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter .14.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	Of the cure of ehacrats which is done on the eyelid:
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This alxacrati which is done on the eyelid, which is aptly named vertadierament alxacrati; and it is of two types, either natural or accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	But if it is accidental, it is not due to the eyelid itself, but because there is some cold and moist humour in the eyelid which cannot drain in any other way than directly, and alxacrati is named for that which is directly vertadieramente. However, if it is accidental, it is caused by a wound or a tear or cautery or something similar.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	And the method of operation for this is that you take a needle with a double thread, and pierce the flesh, and make the thread pass from the tear duct on the left into the one on the right, so that the thread passes through both ends of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	Then stretch out the flesh at its edges with the needle and sew it up with the needle, and insert the needle with a broad spatula.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And so if it returns the shape of the eyelid as it should be, that is good; and if not, take a needle and place it in the split figure, and with that convert the eyelid, and close both slits on either side of the eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And the ends of the two slits are two angles of the incision, which you have made so that they meet; and an angle is made from them when they come together, and a figure is made from them.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is a Greek letter: the lambda.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And then cut the flesh to the amount that is the edge of it below it, so that it does not hinder the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then bring the separated parts together and sew them with a thread of wool; and then cure those with what we have said about the softening medicines and the poultices until it is healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if alxacrati occurs due to a wound or a tear or cautery, then you should split with a flat fissure over the hairs of the eyelid as has been described.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And then separate with the poultice between two lips as we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the sum of the speech on the cure of alxacrati when it is above or below, let there be an operation in it, according to how it is prepared for the form of alxacrati; and that is in the form of different dots.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the wise artisans always prepare in whatever way is possible for them to return the figure to its natural form, or close to it, and that patient according to what suits them from the operation and the instruments in the greatest dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter .15.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	Of the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation occurs to many people who have the eyelid glued more above the white of the eye, and is prohibited from the facility of movement and its natural actions, therefore you should insert the edge of a needle under the eyelid, and raise it up, or stretch it with unguent.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And then you insert the adhesion with a broad spatula, which does not have any sharpness to the incisions, having dulled a little so that the patient is not disturbed after the operation, and remove the spatula so that it does not hurt the eye with its sharpness.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And your incision should cut through that adhesion with ease so that the eyelid is returned to its natural form, and all the adhesion is healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And then you put into the eye salted water with which you wash it; or distill in it wine dissolved in water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And then separate between the eyelid and the eye with a poultice of eggs, and apply over the eye wool soaked in white of egg; and on the third day use causes to consolidate it until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter .16.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	Of incision of nail and prominence of flesh in the tear ducts.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Know that ungla is according to two ways; for it may be nervous, and be like a hard, thin cipha; or it may not be nervous, like white moisture congealed, which when the iron touches it, may be taken with unguent, and it is severed and the unguent is not put in it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both kinds do not heal except from the major tear duct as it gradually covers the sight and prohibits light and movement of the eye.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	But the way to act in the incision of it is that the patient tilts his head down, and then open his eyes, and raise the eyelid with your hand, and then gather the nail with little doublings of unguent and stretch it upwards.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And then take a needle and pierce with it the nail of a horse or ox or cow or similar animal, or of strong fiber, or double the end of the needle little by little and insert that into the edge of the nail, and pierce with the needle, and bind with wax the nail; and stretch it upwards, and loosen it on its edges, and cut with the fiber the side of the nail which covers the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And so you follow that with the fiber into the depths of it.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And then you insert the remnants into the roots of the tear duct with a broad spatula or small forceps, and cut the flesh of the natural tear duct so that through incision of it there are not continuous flows of tears.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And sometimes the nail with its single unguent, as we have said, and then it is severed by a lion’s spatula of which this is the form of it:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And beware that with the spatula you do not touch the tunic cornea and that it comes in it a rupture; and that the pupil is perforated.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And then the incision is made in the eye with a little powdered salt or ash made of cinammon, and let it stay there until the next day; and then cure that with what comes into it until it is healed.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot insert the needle into it or put unguent in it, then many times this kind of nail is cured with medicines, and is healed thus with eye and covered in its division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to cut it, then open the eye of the patient and take a broad lion’s spatula with sharp iron according to this form:
am subtilitat.	with subtlety.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if it is hard and tight and the unguent does not come into it, then distill from your eye wine made of cinammon or with strong vinegar, and open the eye on the next day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat the operation on that part where everything is from him, unless the opposite pustule is in the hole, because then you would cut that one open and treat the pustule at its beginning so that it heals.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat your operation on that part for as long as it takes to heal.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The tear duct, if you see it in the hole because of great harm, should be suspended with a thread; and cut that one part open, and do not finish the incision so that no tears flow out.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	Then distill rose water into the tear duct and do this with myrrh until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	Of the incision of a hernia and of what is born from tight flesh in the hole.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Sometimes in the holes of some people, red flesh is born, and it is above-placed so that it covers the pupil, or it is close to or pressing on the eyelids, and it strongly presses the eyelids against the parts in front, and it is attached like a ball bearing.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	The operation on him is that the patient places his head in your lap, and then you open those holes and gather up all that flesh with appropriate threads, and take it with a forceps or basket; and then cut the flesh at its beginning so that everything finishes with the scissors, and be careful of the hole that you do not harm it with your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And your incision should be with that which you use to cut those things, or with a spatula which we have mentioned in the incision of the nail, or with small scissors with which the shape of it is gathered according to what is appropriate in this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	So when your incision is complete and all that flesh is cut, then fill the hole with ground salt, or distill into it red powder and similar medicines, and place over the hole in front a bandage with egg white so that it is protected from pustules.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if for any cause hernia is caused and there is pus, and you fear pustules, then cut open the hole and treat that pustule with what causes that pustule to yield, and then repeat your operation on it until it is healed, and similarly do on the tight flesh which occurs in this kind of hole.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	But indeed you should guard against all treatment of the hole by natural or accidental way, doing it with iron, and not put your hand in any of these operations unless you see that that member is suffering that operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	Of the gathering of pus in the hole.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Pus are red veins which are hardened on the hole and forbid its treatment, and they open the hole over a period of days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	So it is necessary at the beginning that you consider if the hole in which there is pus is strong and in it there is not another illness other than pus, then you gather that pus.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And it is that you command the patient to place his head in your lap, and then suspend those veins with a thread or two according to your discretion; and let that thread be of subtle double thickness according to this form:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or two threads graded into one body according to this form:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And then let those veins be tied with strong subtle threads, and press the blood now and then, until you see those veins being sucked back into the hole and being rolled up.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And be careful not to harm the hole with the end of the spatula; and if your operation is in the middle of the forehead, and let it be steady in your operation so that you do not cut except those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have finished, then distill into the hole head green wine or red so that with its keenness it corrodes what is sucked back from the pus.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	But if it is not possible for you to gather all of that in one hour, then let him take something for the pain of it, and let him be for several days until the pain of him is calmed and he is protected from pustules.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat on him according to what was mentioned before so that he is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the form of the scissors:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	Of the reduction of hernia in the nose.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you cure hernia with cautery or with a sharp instrument when it is preceded by narration of it and is not healed, then do not put anything in it except that you cut on the pustule because of its maturity, and let you draw out all the humidity which is in it and the pus until the bone is uncovered.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	So when the bone is uncovered and you see in it corruption or blackness, then scrape it with an instrument of which this is the form:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And it is made of hard iron, and let the tip be rounded in this way so that it is made pointed by filing or with an awl (in this way as it is in the following figure).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And place that on the decayed part of the bone, and then roll it between your fingers, and press your hand little by little until you know that the corruption is scraped.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And let that be done several times, and then restore the place with astringent and styptic causes.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	So if the place is consolidated and good flesh has grown on it and the body has recovered from the sickness for more than 40 days, and it is not renewed or pustules arise in it or accidents happen to it, then you know that it is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	But if not, then do not put anything in it except to reduce the fracture to the form of the nose, and according to this way: let you uncover it according to bone with iron or with a sharp instrument, and when the bone is uncovered, then take gangrene according to this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	Let its end be triangular with iron, and its base be pressed inwards towards the end so that it is extended outwards as it is shown there.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	And then place that on the bone, and let it be near the tear duct; and lengthen your hand a little from the hole, and then roll your hand with the tribe so that it penetrates all the bone, and let him feel the patient for heat that comes out of his hand.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	So then restore the place with astringent and styptic medicines as well as you have heated them.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	So when the flesh and the place are hardened, then the matter which flowed to the parts in front returns to the nose, therefore that is pus over the patient.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	Of the reduction of a protruding hole.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the hole protrudes with its totality and does not occur in the swelling nor decrease, then you should loosen the patient, and then let him hold his breath, and then press on the cervix with a scarification and suck strongly with good suction; and then place liniment which is made of alum and aloe and myrrh, and then cover the plaster on the hole with strong poultices.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the way of the poultices is that you take sheets of linen cloth, and let each sheet be doubled into four folds; and make those sheets.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And then place those one over the other according to the quantity of which he has need of it.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And then press on those with a firm bandage with strong tightness; and repeat the cups with suction after scarification; and let him keep the cups and examine the hole day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	But if meanwhile the ligament is softened, then let it be made tight.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And you should stop the bleeding near the wound during both day and night as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that the blood has already been reduced, that is good; but if not, then repeat the poultice with powders and the bandage and leeches until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	Of the beginning of the swelling in the tunica intima.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When there is a rupture in the tunica intima and it protrudes outside the eyelids like the tip of a pea, and it assumes a round shape due to this, and you want to operate on it, then the operation should be performed as follows: You should insert a needle at the base of the intima where the rupture is located, below in the upper part; then you should insert another needle with a double thread in the lacrimal gland, and allow that to penetrate while keeping the first needle in place according to its position. Then you should pierce the area of the double fold and lift it up using the needle, and tighten that thread.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	Then pull out the needle and place over the wound wool infused with egg white, and allow it to fall due to the thread being attached to the intima.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And you should care for the wound in this way until the ulcer is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And sometimes, a great swelling can form throughout the entire eyelid, and it should be punctured with a thin spatula that reaches the subcutaneous part of the wound, and the white moisture should run out, and the swelling should descend and go inside immediately.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And you should tighten it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De curacio de alconati.	Of the cure of hawks.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This disease that is called alconatis is nothing but an inflammation that is located in the eye, resembling water that is flowing down and not being absorbed.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	The way to treat it is to make the patient sit upright and straight, then take his head in your hands from both sides, and move it so that you can see the inflammation flowing down to the lower parts, then dry it up and prevent it from descending, and damage the light, and the patient should see the cause just as he did before.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not flow down, you should know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	But if the inflammation is not prepared to flow down by what we have said, then make the patient sit between your hands, and take a thin spatula and place it on the skin covering the tiny space between the conjunctiva and the cornea in the limbus (in that area where the white of the eye joins the transparent part), so that the inflammation can be pushed out.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Once it is pushed out, then you should distill water into the eye that has honey mixed in it, or water in which you have boiled fenugreek and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And you should cure it with the other causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 23.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	Of the cure for water flowing down from the eye.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already said about the types of water in the division and which one is suitable to be punctured with a needle according to the condition, then you should do that according to the health status.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Then you should make the patient sit between your hands on a chair and lift his head, then he should move his eye up and down, then it will be tightened.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	Then you should place your left hand near the eyelid of his eye, if the eye with the water is on the left; or your right hand if it is the right eye.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	Then you should take alum with your right hand if the eye is on the left; or with your left hand if it is on the right.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	Then you should place the end of the alum near the limbus due to the thickness of the white in the tear film of the lower part of the lacrimal gland, and you should press alum with strength and rotate your hand around it.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	Then penetrate into the tear film of the eye and you will feel that alum has already reached the root cause.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And you should measure the path of alum to the root, and the distance of the space that is from the pupil until the end of the blackness, and it is the limbus of the eye; because you will see the pupil with the vision of the eye due to the clarity of the tunica cornea.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	Then you should place alum in the area where the water is, and you should pull it down once or twice, and therefore if the water flows down immediately, then you should see the patient over whom he will open his eyes immediately, and alum in his eye.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	Then you should rest for a moment; therefore if the water has flowed down, then you should place alum again another time before alum is pushed in.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And therefore when it is dried up and does not flow down, then you should pull alum out with ease, and rotate your hand around it a little by little, and you should dissolve in the water a little of clear salt of gemma and wash the eye inside; then you should place outside the eye a cotton pad or stopa or wool infused in rosewater and egg white and tie it on with that.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	But some of us and those who are from our time place on it a comb soaked in egg white.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it does not obey you with alum in the instrument of the eye due to its hardness — because it is the case of some men whose eyes are hard —, then you should take the spatula that is named "alberid" of which this is the form:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And therefore puncture it with that the conjunctiva, and do not finish your hand in the puncturing, and it is not unless you make a path for alum to reach its subtile place.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	Then you should insert alum according as we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And after you finish your work, the patient's sleeping accommodation should be prepared, in which he sleeps on his back in a dark room, and all movements should be prohibited.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And you should place over him something to cover his nature so that it is cooled down, and do not turn his head to the right or left at all.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And let the swelling be according to its disposition until the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And you should loosen it in that dark room and show him the light, and let him see some causes, and you should return the swelling to its condition on the seventh day.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And do not do that in the hour of the cure or immediately then you should do the infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	While you are doing this, you should keep it warm so that the water can flow more and stronger through guarding.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	But if inflammation occurs, then you should loosen the eye before the seventh day, and rectify it with that which softens inflammation.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Then you should absolve the eye and place over it an oral poultice by which the eye is ruled from below for several days, existing in the dark room.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And you should let it dry little by little and converse about its causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And know that in alchatea the disciple of vision is not excused from seeing some views, and then you should see ardently about the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And it has been received from some of those who are the Artach , and some say that fire is made in Ayrac magdaam punctured by which water is sucked out.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	But indeed we have not seen it done in our land which was believed to have been done, nor has it been seen in any of the ancients' books; and it is possible that it is new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of the species of magdaan so that it should be over those who ignore them:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And they should be made of iron or steel specifically, and the tips of them have this triangular subtlety, the acute tip like that is the shape.
Capitol .xxiv.	Here begins the twenty-fourth chapter.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	Of the cure of flesh stuck in the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When in the nose are grown various flesh tumors of which there is some cause, which is similar to the scorpion sting or to a polyp stone; and this malady is called polypus because it represents that stone in appearance.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And from it is cancerous flesh, scaly, of a dusky colour; and from it is that which is not dusky in colour but leonine flesh.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore, when you are to treat one who has this flesh but not fraudulent or cancerous, let him fast between his fingers and be laid in the sun, and open up his nose and stick your thumb into that flesh.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	Then extract it to the edges outwardly, and then cut off what you have grasped of that flesh with a sharp, pointed instrument, until you know that all the flesh has been removed; for if anything is left in there from which removal is possible, then you should treat it with one of the subtle instruments with ease so that nothing is left.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	But if it is bleeding or has an acidic pustule, then you should stop that with what the patient holds; or if it is one of the malignant pustules, then you should cut and cauterize that until blood is let out and all the cavities are opened.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	Then let it be treated in the nose near where the incision was made with wine or water or vinegar.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	But if the nose is open and from it flows moisture into the palate, then know that it has healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	But if the moisture does not penetrate as it should, then you should know that within it is flesh grown in the pustules over bones of the nose to which no removal has come about.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Therefore, then let the patient swallow bile from which there is some thickness, and suck in his mouth seeds of nuts, and place between each nut the quantity of a finger or less, and cause the patient to yawn and insert one end of the bile into the nose with the ray or another cause by which it is possible.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And after this has been done, let him blow his breath into it until it reaches the passages of the nose, and spit out onto his handkerchief, for troops of children do this action in schools, and it is a lighter cause for him who wishes to do so.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	Then place the two ends of the bile, one end that comes out over the nose and the other that goes into the nose, and then administer cutting of flesh with the nuts that are in the bile, and do this until you know that the flesh has been cut by the nuts in the bile.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	Then extract the bile and place in the nose, near where the blood is being let out, a sponge, and do this for three days or more until the gum has corroded all that which is left of the flesh.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And at the end of the treatment, let a lead tube be placed in the nose for several days until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	But if there are other remedies that dry out, use that one.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the instrument to the purging of the nose through which oils and medicines are distilled into the nose:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And make it from silver or iron, which is similar to a small open lamp, like a small cauldron, and the mead similarly.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you wish, make a closed tube like a cane, and the canal of the instrument to the purging of the nose be round, uncovered; to which is attached in its back, with which you grasp it, when you heat in it oil or water that you wish from the sucks and the causative remedies.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And these are the expensive purges: take of beaver castoreum, white beryl, ginger, long pepper, spikenard, and saffron; of black pepper one-third of an ounce, of nard one-third of an ounce, and of myrrh one-third of an ounce. Take the oils with a little water of bloodroot and holly, and let the pills be made, and one pill should be dampened with vinegar water and be placed in the nose of the patient sitting upright.
Capitol .xxv.	Here begins the twenty-fifth chapter.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	Of warts on the ends of the nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Warts are often found on the ends of the nose, and it grows large and swells in several days unless proper care is taken of it.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And for this reason you should dig into the beginning of its appearance, and cut off all of that.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	Then place on top of it or cauterize or burn with a medicine that is burning in that location.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	But if its growth is delayed so that it becomes large, then consider if it has become hard, of dusky colour and of little feeling, then do not touch it with iron which is an evil apoplexy; for many times when you cut into this apoplexy, it causes great harm to the one who has it.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the apoplexy is of leonine touch and not of dusky colour, and its incision is possible in all of that, then evacuate the patient and cut into it without fear, and treat the location with what flows out and constrict it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Here begins the twenty-sixth chapter.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	Of sewing up of the nose and of the lips and of the ear when the continuity is dissolved by pus or similar.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	Know that when dissolution of continuity happens in one of these cartilages, few give way to that operation except for some men.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when because of some cause to these, you should consider if it is fresh pus with blood, then you should bring together the two lips of the pus with sewing, and then treat that until it is healed.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the lips of dissolution of continuity are already separated, and each one is healed, then you should cut off each part of the visible vein until blood flows out.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then bring together the two lips with sewing and strengthen those, and over that powder blood of dragon’s blood and pound it, and place over the powder a poultice of diaphoretic plaster, or of one of the other plasters that are consolidative, and let it lie for two days or three, and then remove it and change the plaster and let it lie until the veins are cut off, and then treat with ointment until it is healed.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	But the manner of sewing is that you add the dissolution of continuity or with nails as we have recorded in sewing up of the belly, or add the dissolution of continuity with bile as we will tell later.
Capitol .xxvii.	Here begins the twenty-seventh chapter.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	Of extraction of those causes that come in both lips in the openings between teeth.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Many times in some men are found in the openings between teeth of their lips some hard pustules that resemble warts, and some are small and some are large.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Therefore you should open up the lips and split each one of those hard spots all around, and then fill up that space with sagion pounded until the blood is constricted, and then wash it with wine water and treat the location with what is constricted until it is healed.
Capitol .xxviii.	Here begins the twenty-eighth chapter.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	Of cutting of flesh joined to the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Many times grow on the gum flesh that is joined which the ancients called albus, so then you should suspend it with wax or what you have that one with tongs and cut off that with your knife until its root, and let the pus flow out or the blood.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	Then spread on the wound a mixture of powdered styptic or astringent herbs, or both.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if the tissue comes back, cut it again and cauterize it; for then the cautery will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	Of toothache.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When in the surface of the teeth of the gums there are sharp, rough spots and holes, and between the gums there is corruption and the teeth become loose.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	So you should open the patient's mouth and place his head in your lap, and hold his teeth so that they do not move, and examine the teeth where there are holes, and remove the cause of them; and this will cure the blackness and citrinity and other things which remain inside.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	If this has happened in the beginning of the disease, then it is good; but if not, you must repeat the treatment on those for a second or third day until it reaches its conclusion as you desire.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	Know that teeth have different needs of many remedies of diverse forms and figures according to how it is prepared for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And the scaler with which teeth are scaled from their roots is different from the scaler with which they are scraped between them according to other forms; and you should prepare these forms of scrapers as soon as you see them:
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter 30.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	Of tooth extraction.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	You should cure the tooth of its pain with every artifice and delay in any extraction, for there is no cause to suspect that it will grow back when it has been extracted, for it is a sublime substance which causes suspicion in the extraction of it.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	But if the patient is forced to have that tooth extracted, you must be certain which is the aching tooth, for often the pain deceives the patient and may be in a healthy tooth, and you extract that and the pain does not cease until the aching and sickly tooth has been extracted, for we have seen this through the operation of the barber.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	So how you should be certain which is the aching tooth and if you know it well, then you must scarify the gum around the tooth with a spatula on which there is some virtue, so that it may be dissolved from the gum entirely, and then pull at it gently with your fingers or with subtle forceps little by little until you loosen it.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And then hold him strongly by the jaw with great persuasion or stupor until he cannot move, and place his head between your knees so that you may not harm him, and pull the tooth according to truth without breaking it nor giving the patient more pain.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And if it is not loose, then take one of those instruments and place it beneath the tooth from all sides with ease and pull at its removal so that it is done in the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	But if the tooth is split or worn away, then you must fill that crack with a thread and squeeze it with the tip of your finger so that it does not get caught when you tighten it in your grip.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And you must open widely with scarification around the gum entirely and be careful of your strength so that you do not break it or tear it; then return to the patient for the second pain is greater than the first.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And beware of doing that which ignorant barbers do in their skill and audacity about extraction, without using what we have recommended; for they often bring great sickness on people, which are difficult to be tied up, and the roots of them drawn out entirely, or some of those, or that you extract it with some bone of the jaw so as we have often witnessed.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And then after its extraction, wash the mouth with wine and vinegar or wine and salt.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if afterwards blood flows from it, as often, then take some alum and sprinkle it over the wound; and if that alum does not stop it, cauterize it.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The form of the forceps and subtile tongs with which it is gripped at the beginning should be of long length, short handle and thick, so that they do not bend when you must work with them.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And let them be of such gross handles so that when you tighten them, they do not bend; let their tips be short.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And let them be made of Indian iron formed from straight pieces; and at the tips of those should be teeth which one intrudes into the other and tighten with a strong grip; and sometimes the tips of those are in the form of a hawk's beak, so that it is hooked, and they are of strong constriction.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	Of tooth extraction and the cutting out of bones from the jaws that are broken.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you must extract a tooth which is broken, then you should put over the wound some cotton for one or two days until it softens; and then insert your fingers or forceps the tips of which are fashioned like a hawk' s beak or hooked, the form of the forceps:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The tips of them are made from inside as with a file or chisel.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if it does not obey your command with these forceps or tongs, then you should cut away around the root and strip off all the flesh and insert the instrument called an awl, which is a little lever, the form of which is this:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And it should have a short thick tip, and not bent so that it does not get caught.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	So if by that the root is loose, it is good; but if not, help yourself with these other instruments of which these are their forms: the form of the first instrument is triangular at its tip in which there is some thickness:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The form of the second instrument is that it be triangular and more slender at its tip.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And you are helped with this instrument having two ramps, the form of which is thus:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	And with other instruments used in grinding teeth; for youth is done with this instrument which is fashioned like the testicle of a ram, and this is its form:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	Of the triangular tip bent or short, in which there is some thickness, and not bent so that it does not get caught.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And know that the instruments of teeth are most like other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	But the wise and subtle artisans of this art find out for themselves according to what indicates the operation and various sicknesses; for there are sicknesses to which the ancients did not assign nor prepare a proper instrument, due to the forms of their diverse species.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the jaw or other bones are broken, or if it is swollen, then let it be bound up on its place with that which is convenient to it of the instruments and forceps we have spoken of in the extraction of the tooth roots; and help yourself with a bandage the form of which is this:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And let it be bound up little by little with something thick, and let it be bound or held at the mouth so that it may not escape or open until all of its bone is loose; then restore the wound with convenient medicines to that.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if there is some inflammation in the bone, then scrape it of that inflammation and its blackness, and cure it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter 32.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	Of the treatment of teeth protruding over others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When teeth protrude beyond their natural size, particularly in women and especially in the elderly, one must consider: if a tooth stands alone and is not attached to another tooth, and there is no way to apply pressure or a poultice to it, then extract that tooth; but if it is attached to another tooth, then one should cut into it with this instrument, which has a shape like the mouth of a pig and is made of Indian iron with an extremely sharp edge.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And your incision should be the size through which you will cut into it over several days, according to the hardness of the tooth, and so that none of the other teeth are affected.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if a protruding tooth is exposed to air, then file it down with an Indian iron file of this shape:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And it should all be made of Indian iron with an edge that is evenly sharp; and it should have tiny points like the file with which needles are made, with which the tooth is filed a little at a time over several days, so that no other tooth is affected or damaged.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	Then smooth it out at the end and polish it with some razor blades.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if a tooth that is bitten into and pressed down upon by the tongue, then one should smooth out that spot where it is bitten so that the sharpness of that portion is blunted and flattened, so that the tongue is not cut nor speech impaired.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter 33.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	Of the restoration of damaged teeth with gold or silver.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When teeth suffer concussion and displacement from a blow or from falling down, and the patient cannot bear to chew on that side, and your treatment with astringent medicines has not worked, then so long as they are not loose there is skill in strengthening them with gold rather than silver; for silver turns green and soon wears away after a few days, but gold never changes color.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And the gold should be of such fineness and thickness according to how much can fit between the teeth; and the technique of the filling is that you take the gold and make twice as much as you need between two healthy teeth, and then let it grow with two curves of gold between two damaged teeth, or if only one or several are damaged, so that it reaches the healthy tooth on the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	Then repeat the process at the beginning of the damaged portion that you started with, and strengthen your hand with ease and skill so that it is not damaged.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And your compression as you tighten the gold should not let go of the roots of the teeth so that it does not slip out.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	Then cut off the excess gold with forceps or tweezers, and press it into each spot with your fingers, and shape and smooth it out between the healthy tooth and the damaged tooth so that it does not cut the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	Then let it harden as tight as a Roman road.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	But if it is loose or broken, strengthen it with another filling in the same way at all times.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the form of teeth and the shape of the filling between two healthy teeth and two damaged ones, as they are bound together thus:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when one or two teeth return to their sockets after falling out and are regrown as we have described, and become loose again:
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And it is not easy except for skilled and wise artisans.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And sometimes a cow’s tooth is prepared for some reason, and it is made into the shape of a tooth, and placed in the place where the tooth fell out, and strengthened as we have said, and it remains and serves for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter 34.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	Of the incision of the membrane that appears on the tongue, and prohibits speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This membrane which sometimes appears underneath the tongue, either naturally or accidentally due to an illness that has already healed.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation on it is that you open the patient’s mouth, lower their jaw; and raise their tongue, and then cut into that nerve membrane according to how far it is relaxed from the incision.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	But if there is any hardness or swelling in it, and this is caused by the healing of an illness, then you should put some oil on it and cut into it where you first cut into the membrane and where the swelling has dissolved.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And be careful that there is no fissure in the flesh of the tongue, and that you cut through the artery and cause bleeding.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	Then wash the cut with vinegar or warm water, and then place the tongue back into its socket; for it is a membrane that the patient’s tongue is kept in on each night so that it does not heal over again.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	But if bleeding occurs, then put powdered vitriol on it; but if the blood clots, then cauterize the spot with a red-hot cautery that is suitable for such a thing.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	Then heal it according to the other causes by which it was caused.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	Of the extraction of a ranula from under the tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Sometimes an ulcer appears underneath the tongue that is similar to a small nut, which prevents the tongue from performing its natural function; and it is enlarged as it fills the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the operation on it is that you open the patient’s mouth, looking at the ulcer in front of their face; and you consider the ulcer:
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you see it as black or dark colored, hard, to which the patient does not respond with feeling, then do not touch it because it is rotten.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it is white and soft, then put oil on it, and cut into it with fine spatulae; and if blood comes out in the hour of your operation, then press it gently with a sponge, as if it were vitriol, so that the bleeding stops.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then return to your work until you have completed it, after which wash it with warm water and vinegar, and heal it according to what caused it so that it is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter 36.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	Of the extraction of an ulcer from two ears, and of that which is found in the gullet, and of other ulcers.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When pus gathers in the gullet and becomes hard like a gland, the pus of which comes out and is called two ears, when you heal it with what we have said in the previous chapter and it is not healed, then consider whether the ulcer is hard, dark colored, without feeling, then do not touch it with iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is red colored and the vein is thick, then do not cauterize it with iron because of the flow of blood; before you let it heal itself, or else it will burst on its own.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is white colored, raw, and the vein is fine, then that is what should be cut into.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the operation on it is that you consider, before your operation, if the ulcer has rested completely after being cauterized or if it has diminished at all from any diminishment; and then let the patient look towards the sky, and his jaw should be lowered so that his chin is on his chest, and open his mouth with the help of a noble instrument, of which this is the shape:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And it should be made of silver or of steel, and it should be fine like a needle.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	Therefore, when you press it with your finger and the pustule is shown to you, cut it with your knife, then grab it with tweezers and place it in the poultice, and pull it out to the outside as much as you can.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Another thing is that you remove some cause from the tissues, and then cut it with an instrument of which this is the shape:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	and is like a pair of forceps, except that its ends are curved so that the hole in each of them faces in the opposite direction, and they are very sharp; it should be made out of iron and plated with tin.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	But if this instrument is not available to you, then cut it with a spatula whose shape is as follows: and it should be sharp on one side and blunt on the other side.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And after you have cut one wound, cut the other according to this method of cutting, and then wash the patient with water rubbed with salt.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if blood flows from it, treat it with water in which the bark of a pomegranate or bay leaf has been boiled; and also use remedies that constrict the flow of blood, until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And sometimes pus will appear in the armpit, and you should cut it according to what has already been said about cutting two wounds at the same time.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And I once treated a woman who had an abscess that had formed in her armpit; it was a dark color and didn't hurt much, and it had closed off her armpit; the woman could barely breathe, she had to be fed and given water to drink, and she would have died if this had gone on for one or two more days.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the abscess was so large that it had pushed out for almost two months through two openings.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	So I cut it open and placed one of their tweezers in it, and pulled out a great deal from her; then I cut it where I understood the other opening to be, and also closed off its mouth, pressed her tongue, and placed the tweezers inside the abscess.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And I cut out a large portion of it, and only a little blood flowed from it.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Then the armpit of that woman was completely closed off, and she began drinking water right away and also eating food; so I did not stop cutting that abscess many times over a long period, and it kept forming in the same place as before.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Then I gauged and cauterized her armpit, then bound it with an additional bandage; and I walked around and did not know what God had done to her.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter 37.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	On cutting of a hovel when it is pustular.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When pus drains from the nose and it is pustular and long, then it is called a perpendicular; and if it is thick and round at its lower end, then it is called a bulla.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	But if it is cured by what has already been said in the division and does not agree with your treatment, and it sometimes happens that pus is drawn out from it and it is thin; and if it is round at its end and blood-red or black in color and not painful to the patient, then beware of cutting it, for there is danger in cutting it.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you see it according to the way that I have said about its whiteness and length, then press the patient's tongue with an instrument whose shape you know; and then place one of the tweezers in the pustule, pull it down and cut it with either of the two instruments with which I instructed you to cut two wounds.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And beware of cutting it except where it is right on the natural line; for if you cut beyond that, you will harm its parts.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And when cutting, use what I recommended in the cutting of two wounds, and treat it so that it is healed.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the patient is frightened by cutting it, then use fire in cauterizing it without fear, and the way of cauterizing it is not except with sharp water; and it is that you place the head of the patient on your lap, press his tongue with the instrument I have said, and grab the water which I mentioned in the chapter on cauterization, and apply the cause while alive, and pause neither thick nor thin, and fill the cavity of the instrument whose shape I have described.
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	Let the end of it be hollowed out in which the medicine is placed just like the cavity of a spoon, and place the instrument with the medicine over the nostril; and let the patient lean on his side so that saliva or spittle from his mouth does not fall into the nostril due to the medicine, so that no cause falls onto his armpit.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And with your hand hold the medicine and squeeze it over the uvula through a space of about half an hour until you see that it is blackened and subdued by the medicine's biting.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you wish, take a cotton swab and wrap it around the end of the nostril, and dip the swab in the medicine and insert the nostril with the swab in a tube so that the swab adheres to the tube; and do this as many times until you achieve what you want from cauterizing the grape, and then let it be dried out and fall off after about three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that the medicine needs to be repeated, then repeat it; and after cauterizing, clean around the grape with a swab dipped in wine, and cleanse it inside with what is in the circuit of the nostril from the medicine, and wash it with water rubbed with salt, and treat it outside with ointment, and inside with remedies until it is healed.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this kind of treatment is safer than cutting and longer-lasting in terms of fear.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Sometimes the ulcer is cured by what is thinner than cauterizing and cutting, for it is cured by sub-fuming in this way: take chalk, hyssop, orris root, ruda, Arabic scinched, camomile, and brew them together with the others according to their kind, and add all of these causes into a wave, and boil it; and let the wave be laded with decent wax, and let there be a tube in the middle of the wave on which is placed an instrument made of silver or iron.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And let its end be inserted into the mouth of the patient so that the vapor reaches the uvula over the nostril, until the uvula is greatly obscured.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And repeat this over it several times until it is dried out; and beware of doing this while the food for the apostema comes out, for it will be too tight in the apostema, and you should not do that unless the apostema is cauterized.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	But if this instrument is not available to you, then take a reed and attach a hole of horn to its end so that the mouth of the patient is bent; for the horn's hole prevents the vapor from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this treatment is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter 38.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	On drawing out thorns and what adheres in the armpit, and of other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Sometimes thorns or the spine of a fish or another cause adheres in the armpit.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Then, if you wish to extract what is apparent from those parts, upon which the eye falls, press the tongue with an instrument before the sun, so that it may be revealed to you what is in the throat.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And that which is hidden and occult in the gullet, let it be caused to vomit before food has been digested in the stomach; for very soon the cause attached to the throat will be forgotten by vomiting. Or let the patient eat a piece of turnip or lettuce, or a mouthful of dry bread; or take a piece of dried sea-sponge and moisten it with bile, and then swallow it down, for when it reaches the place where the pain is located, it will be forgotten.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And if you take an eel and moisten it with bile and let it be within the mouth and then gently extracted; or take a leek and gently insert it and gently pull it out again.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	But if they are not forgotten by these causes which we have mentioned, then use an instrument of lead in this shape:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And let it be thicker than a small one, and at its end have a cavity which you may introduce into his throat with ease.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And let him keep his head elevated, and guard against touching the bone of his throat, lest he cause pain to himself or to the doctor with his hand.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	But it is better that the doctor himself inserts it because of his knowledge of the location of the attached cause and presses it downward and pulls his hand upward with the instrument, all according to the amount that is prepared within him until it is forgotten.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter XXXIX.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	Of pains that are made in the members of the body. Of bleeding attached to the throat.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When bloodletting is performed with what we have said in the division of the cure with medicines and not with cauteries, consider then in the throat of the patient toward the sun, since you have pressed his tongue with an instrument as we have recommended.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Therefore, if you wish to see the bloodletting, draw it out with a needle that is very small or with a fine and decently sharp one.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not possible for you to draw it out with that, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the throat of the patient, and then pause in the concavity of the cannula a hot iron, and do this as many times (until the bloodletting has stopped and the pain leaves the throat) and abstain from water all day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	And then take a pitcher full of water and pour it over his mouth with that, and wash his throat with it; and do not swallow any of the water but spit it out into the pitcher again with your hand, for as soon as the bloodletting feels the water it will come out.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	But if it is not forgotten by what we have recommended, then smoke the patient with camphor or asafetida through the instrument which we have recommended in the smoking of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do this, namely when it falls.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And there is another manner of operation in the smoking of it; namely that you take a wave in which are burning coals and the wave be covered with a cover on whose middle is a hole, and let the end of the instrument be fitted in the hole, then do the smoking from above. And let the patient close his mouth over the end of the cannula so that the smoking may not escape while you know that the smoking has reached the bloodletting because the bloodletting will soon fall.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if it does not fall, then repeat the smoking several times and let the patient abstain from drinking, and eat salt causes and als, and do not drink water, and then necessarily this regimen will be forgotten.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the form of the instrument with which bloodletting is drawn from the throat when it is seen; and it is like forceps thus you see except that in it there is some curvature:
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	which is placed in the throat and its end is like a stork's beak which is gloved, in whose middle is tightened with a limed, so that when it presses any cause, that one does not slip.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter XL.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	Of pains that are made in the members of the body. In which is contained the sum of speech in perception of apostemas and in section of them.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	The apostemas are of various species, from various manners according to what we remember of them, each in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they are diverse in penetration and section of them by two manners, one of which is according to the species of apostemas themselves; and the other according to what we perceive from moisture.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second manner is near to the sites in which they occur in the body, for the apostema that occurs on the head is another from the apostema that occurs in the buttock; and the apostema in the fleshy site is another from the apostema that occurs in a joint; and each of them is treated by operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And yet there are some apostemas which must not be penetrated but rather their maturity must be ripened or completed.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	And yet other apostemas which must be cut when they are crossed and not ripened according to their completion; or apostemas that are near to the joints, for when apostema comes near a joint its nature is prolonged within while it presses what is in the circuit of it and very soon corrupts the ligaments or nerves of that joint, so that it makes a cause of contraction of that member; or apostema which is near a main member, if you delay the penetration of it until it has ripened unsoundness reaches to the main member; or apostema near the buttock, therefore penetrate it not-matured, and let not the perforation be cruel but rather that one which is near to the buttock so that its pressure does not make the membrane of it protrude and be elongated to the parts within the buttock, and a fistula be made or that one which is made in the end of it if it is not healed.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	But know the time of the penetration of the apostema and thus when it has ripened.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And know that it has ripened when there is the cessation of pain and fever, and then a decrease in heat and pulse, and the acuity of the head of the apostema, and the other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And because know that penetration occurs in the site lowest of the apostema and pus coming from the cure of the eminence.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And penetration always be according to the length of flesh or bone, if the apostemas are in the parts of the feet or hands and in sites of ligaments, of cords of nerves, of arches; and, lastly, in all equal sites in which there is no reflection for in those in which it does reflect use penetration according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	But when the apostema is in a fleshy site then it is better to let the penetration of it be according to what we have said so that its digestion may be confirmed according to completion for if you penetrate it before this, its membrane is prolonged and the tissue of it swells and very soon the lips of it are hardened and its depth.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	But some apostemas are penetrated according to the breadth of flesh or body according to necessity, or according to that member of which it indiges.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And let you administer small penetration and in great apostemas great penetration or wide or many dry ones according to the difference of the size of the apostemas.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And others are pustules in which the skin is sunken and cut, when it is made like a loaf of bread and is made in a way that it has already been, as well as what happens in the case of swollen lymph nodes and boils.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And some of these are cut in a way that they have three angles; and others are cut in the shape of a myrtle leaf, just like the pustules on the armpits.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And some of them are given a round incision and a moon-shaped one, and they are similar to those.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	But if it is not done like this with pustules that are superficial, you should penetrate it with a superficial penetration or just flatten it.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And when the pustule is large and has already collected pus, you should penetrate it and not be afraid to extract all of the content in that hour; you have extracted some from it, and then on the next day, you fill up the pustule again, and then you extract a larger portion, and then you do this several times according to the degree to which it has been absorbed.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	And especially if the patient is of a cold disposition, or a woman in labor, or a small child, or an old person in decline, because the animal spirit is many times resolved by the release of pus, and soon after dies, so you should open them.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	So keep this chapter with great caution, and then make your incision where you open these pustules, and cleanse the wounds and see if the wound of the pustule is small or a flat one; then you administer a few drops of oil or old wine. And if the pustule is large and the incisions are many, then you should apply a cotton pad in each hole so that they can absorb it.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if a part of the skin is cut off or sunken in the circuit, then you should complete it with old oil or a thread made of linen cloth, just like when you treat wounds or roots, without moisture; and then tie it on the third day; and then process it and heal it with something that helps it heal.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	But if there is a flow of blood in the hour of your operation, then you should apply water and vinegar mixed with linen cloth, and place it on the site of the blood flow several times.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	But if the blood flow persists, then you should administer a treatment and healing, and powders which I have recommended in many places in this book.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	But if it is in the winter, and the location of the pustule is a place of many nerves, then you should mix powders with wine and hot oil, and apply them to those places.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is in the summer, and the locations are fleshy, then you should apply powders mixed with water and oil or wine and oil; and let this be applied until the third day, as we have said, and then open the pustule, cleanse it, and administer to its healing something that suits it until it is healed.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And this is what is necessary to know about the cure of pustules universally, but according to the way of distinction, I have already said about every pustule in what manner is the way of its cure by chapters specifically.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter 41.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	On incisions of pustules that come on the skin of the head.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	Small pustules on the skin of the head are of a kind of nodes that contain membranes which are made from them; and the kinds of them are many.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And some of them are pustules, and from those come moisture similar to lime.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And some of them contain moisture like powder, and they are similar to them; and some of them are scaly and hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the incision of all of them, and in the extraction of them, there is no fear; as you should not be afraid to extract them, it does not cause arthritis.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation in the incision of them is that you express those with an instrument the form of which you will see later, whose content I will tell you about now.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	Because if what is contained is moisture, then split it with an incision according to its length by a superficial incision according to this form:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And start the incision on line B towards line G. So when the moisture is evacuated, then scrape away that which contains the moisture, and do not leave any cause for it to return, as many times it returns if you leave any cause for it.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And then immerse it in Egyptian ointment if you have some, and if not, in water and salt; and fill the wound with that, and leave it until the next day, as it corrodes all that is left of that film.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And then apply the Egyptian ointment on it again and again if it has not healed, as many times as you trust that there is no cause for that film to return; then heal the wound with an ointment so that it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if the pustule contains a fatty node, then you should incise it according to this form:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	By making an incision in the shape of a cross, and cut between two lips of the incision and pierce that completely throughout, and apply your strength in extracting the membrane which contains it.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	But if arthritis causes you contradiction, then do what I have told you first.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And similarly do in the scaly pustule by incision and cure as we have said; and the incision on the scaly pustule is lighter pus, because it has little blood and little moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And sometimes some of these pustules are on the head in some people, and there is no moisture in them at all; the cause of this is that I have struck one on the head of an old woman and pricked the pustule like a hard, rough, white pebble, which could not be pierced, and if someone hit it, it would hurt.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	But in other accidental pustules on the head, this is not in this chapter; except for the pustules that come on children's heads and come from the roots of the hair, but the incision of all these should be superficial.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And make the incision on those at the lowest part of them so that it is away from the body of the pus to the lowest parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	And then heal those with something that suits its cure.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 42.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	On the incision of scrofulas that come on the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	Many times these pustules come on the neck and under the armpits and in the groin; and sometimes they come in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that come on the neck, some of them are engendered between them, and every scrofula of them is within its own membrane, and so in the nodes and pustules on the head, as we have recommended.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	And the kinds of these scrofulas are many; some of them are scaly, and some contain moisture, and some are malignant and do not obey cure.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	So in that which you see good disposition in the Touchment, of which the color of what is manifested is close to the color of the skin, and is swollen at all parts, and is not attached to the nerves of the neck, or the veins, or arthritis, and is not deep, then you should incise it with a superficial cut from above to below from the line G towards the line B, and pierce that completely, and scrape it away from all parts, and extend between two lips of the incision with a sharp instrument, or with small incisions if you have need of them, as we have said in the pustules on the head, and extract that little by little.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	It is important that the vein or nerve is not cut.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And make sure that the spatula is not sharp so as to not accidentally touch with it or disturb the patient, and cut only what is necessary to cut; for if you were to cut a vein or artery and prevented from your operation, then stop the wound with vitriol trippled or other powders which stop blood flow, and narrow the wound, and leave inside that which rests upon the edge of the ulceration so as to soften the wound and to start becoming suppurated.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the blood is stopped.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Then return to your operation until you have finished it.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And then examine with your finger the cause of any other small bumps; therefore cut those and clean those.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if there is a large vein in the root of the scrofula then you must not cut that scrofula from its root.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	But instead cover that with a folded piece of cloth and let it fall by itself without harm.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	Then fill the wound with old cheese which you have already submerged in Egyptian ointment and then cure that.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you cut the whole scrofula then cover the two lips of the wound and stop immediately the pus so that there is not any superfluity left.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	But if you see that there is superfluity due to the size of the scrofula, understand cutting its root, and cut it and administer cauterisation and that which was said.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And that of the scrofulas which contain moistness, pierce that with a superficial piercing where it appears to you to be the location of its maturity, and pause a piercing so as for the pus to come out from the bottom of the body, thus as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And then administer a piercing with ointment and similar to those for so that it corrode what has been formed from the corrosion.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And then when you see the wound already cleaned then cure that with generative flesh ointment so it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 43.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	Of section of the pimple of the apoplexy inside the gullet.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	The ancients described this section in the pilhot and I have not seen anyone in our land that it has been done.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of the speech of those.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	But in men who have squintiness cover that the extraction of the pilhot is avoided as not to be done because all the veins and the greater ones of the patient are here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	But in those who have apoplexies with scabs on the mouth or gullet or two ears when the disease is not in the head, use of pilhot section to avoid loss which is made by piercing.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Then when we want that, cut the pilhot below three circles of the circles of the pilhot or four with small section due to width in that which is between two circles in quantity, that the section be in the pharynx, not in the cartilage, and this location is convenient for section because it is deprived of flesh and its vessels of blood from it are thin.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor is timid then let him extend the gullet with a hook and then split the gullet so as to reach the canal but avoid the blood vessels if for some reason.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And then cut the scrotum according as we have described and it is signified over the section of the gullet by the flame which is of that which has come out with that which is of him broken and by the incision of the throat.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And let the wound remain open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Then when the hour is fulfilled in which the piercing is feared add two lips of the gullet of the wound and cut that alone is the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And then administer medicines which make flesh grow so it is healed.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And said Albucasis that the sum of the speech which we have described exposition is not but veined that some of these apoplexies have oppressed the gullet of the patient and the patient has come into death and his breath has been cut off and some go to pierce the epiglottis so that the patient breathes on the spot of the wound from any breathing and be saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And for that command to let the wound remain open until the wickedness of the disease is consumed; and its wickedness lasts for three days; and therefore then I command to close the wound and cure that so it is healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And that which I have seen by my servants is that a servant pressed her breast and moistened in the gullet of the patient and cut from there a part of the pipe of the lung and he was called to its cure and found the blood coming out of the wound small.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Therefore he was confessed that she had not cut vein nor nerve and the wind coming out of the wound and he cured that so fire is healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And did not consent to the servant if she did not want in the throat and after some days returned to milk of her dispositions.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	Now I say that in the section of the pilhot there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 44.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	Of section over apoplexy which occurs in the gullet outward and is called hernia of the gullet.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This apoplexy named hernia of the gullet is great apoplexy according to the colour of the body and occurs in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it is according to two manners because it is either natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And the natural one is without chance of cure.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental one is according to two manners of which one is like node of grass and the other manner is like apoplexy which is made by knotting of artery and in that there is fear.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And do not let it be pressed with iron unless it is small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you probe that and investigate that with the hook and if you tie it like a node of grass and it is not suspended by any of the veins then cut that as well as the nodes and extract that so as to contain it from the skin and sac; and unless let it be scratched all its being, and then cure the location with what covers of cure so it is healed.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 45.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	Of section of the species of nodes.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	The nodes are moved from species and I have already said all the species of them in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And let me account thus the difference between node and exitus with hook of doubt.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	And I say that with exudus is heat and fever and violent pains so that the ebullition of superfluity is stopped; putrefaction is completed when fever stops, pain and heat.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	But with node there is not heat or fever or pain and it counts that phlegmon which is at the sac proper.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And it is according to the colour of the body and its beginning is with a cough and it is made thus with phlegm and it contains humidity and the colours of humidity are various according as I described in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Therefore when you come to the cure of node let him express that and investigate that at the beginning with instrument which is called intrames according as its shape comes in the chapter which is proper for that.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And it is manner of inquiry of apoplexies and all nodes and it is that you take this instrument and insert that in the most humid location which you touch on the apoplexy, and you rotate the ends by that little by little until you know that the instrument has penetrated the gullet.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And then finish your hand according to the size of the abscess, and extract the pus and consider what is left in the wound.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if there is a discharge of any color, then you should incise it superficially as I have said for the other abscesses.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if there is no discharge from the wound, then know that it is fat.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And dry it with an incision in the shape of a cross according to this form:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	So that as it has been taught to you, and suspend that with an incision, and cut the skin of all parts with ease, and keep the hair or sack, if you can, on that and extract that pus with the node.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	But if it is broken in the operation, it is not possible to extract that pus, and many times it is necessary to do so, and then you should extract it little by little so that no cause remains inside of it.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	Because if any cause remains inside of it, a little or a lot, the node will return according to the most.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that a small part remains inside of it, then complete the wound with some corrosive powders and strengthen the wound, and place on top of that where there is an abscess cauterize, and cure that with another cure until it is healed.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if the node is large, then you should cut the two lips of it and cure that with what it incarnates.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	But if the pulse is not beating towards it, or not beating at all, then you should cut and fill the place with boiled tallow that has been cooked in a brazen pot for two or three days until the wound scabs over and the ebullition of the blood stops; and then return to incising what has broken of the node.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	Of the forms of necessary instruments in incision and piercing.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	There are three kinds of these instruments: some are large, others medium, and others small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of the large instrument is this:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of the medium instrument is this:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of the small instrument is this:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	They are made of iron, of lead, and of the ends curved decently, so that the instrument pierces in the abscesses.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are the forms of the experimenters, and they are called albarel, and one of them is called beril.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And there are three kinds: some are large, others medium, and some small.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of the large experimenter is this:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of the medium experimenter is this:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of the small experimenter is this:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	Convenient that they are for abscesses and wounds and fistulas and bumps, caused by bones or other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And they are made round, large and thin like a needle with which the membranes are sewn, and they are made of copper, or iron, or silver; and the best are when they are made of copper.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And they make the experimenters of black feathers, which they say that through them the fistulas are opened in their cavities, in which there is a reflection on their surface from these reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And there are three kinds: some are long, others medium and others short according to the amount of the width of the fistula and the tightness of it.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Form of the large experimenter of lead:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	Form of the medium experimenter of lead:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	Form of the small experimenter of lead:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of the cauteries are of many kinds; some of which are simple and have only one curve, and there are three kinds: large, small and medium.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And their bodies are pointed, and there are three kinds.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And some of them have two curves, and there are three kinds.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And some have three curves, and there are three kinds.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	Form of a simple large point, form of it:
Forma de unci simple migier:	Form of a medium single point:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	Form of a small single point, form of it:
Forma de unci orp gran:	Form of the body of the large point:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Form of the body of the medium point, form of it:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Form of the body of the small point, form of it:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Form of the large point with two curves:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	Form of the medium point with two curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	Form of the small point with two curves:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	Form of the large point with three curves:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Form of the medium point with three curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	Form of the small point with three curves:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the forms of the scalpels with which they cut and pierce the nodes and abscesses, and there are three kinds: large, medium and small.
Forma de scapel gran:	Form of a large scalpel:
Forma del scapel migier:	Form of the medium scalpel:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Form of a small scalpel:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The ends of those with which the incision is made are sharp and the others are not sharp, and they should not be held in that way, but rather made gently on the incision of the node for fear of piercing a vein or nerve, and through them the patient and rest tranquility little by the scorching which scorches away the excoriation of the abscess.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the forms of the cupping glasses, and there are three kinds: large, medium and small, like this with veins.
La forma de magda gran:	Form of a large cupping glass:
Forma de magda migier:	Form of a medium cupping glass:
Forma de magda pauc:	Form of a small cupping glass:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	They are made of copper and are similar to a needle with which is made a point.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And there is a pointed edge at the end punctured with a spike and in that cut to the parts inside and outside, when you want, like this with bees.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of the spatulas are blunted between the fingers for fear of piercing the abscess and not feeling the patients, and there are three kinds: large, medium and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the forms of them:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of the venesection for the flow of blood, and there are three kinds: large, medium and small; the form of them is this:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	They are made of copper, round with no length, and they are thin.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And know that these species of venesection are large, medium and small, so that through them you can draw the blood with speed when necessary, and then when at first there is not medicine.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	But do not use them to draw blood everywhere in the body, and not use it except in fleshy places, like this in the joints of the limbs and in the joints, and in the armpits and on the breast, and in the groin and the groin, similar to the joints of the limbs.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And some are made of other small instruments like this: the blood is drawn when it is done by phlebotomy or piercing of a vein or an artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And there are also round ones according to this form:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	Of the cure of women's breasts which are like this with women.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some are swollen breasts of some men due to the excess of sleep as they begin to sweat, and then the breasts are swollen, and there are similar breasts in women, and Roman apoplexy.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And for those who have this disease, you must cut into the wound with a lunar incision according to this form, from the line of B. to the line of G., and then remove all the roughness, fill the wound with embodied medicine, and sew together the two lips of the wound, and heal what is within until it is healthy.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the breast sags to the sides and is softened by its size in the same way as it does in women, then it should be split into two of its thinnest parts with two incisions that resemble a lunar shape, so that each part contains the other at their ends, and so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form from line B. to line G. Then remove the cord which is between the two lips of the wound, and remove the fat, and administer what we have said about the suturing and powders, which are necessary in the healing process until it is healthy.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you are unable to complete the incision because of the restlessness of the patient and bleeding, then fill the wound with a bandage soaked in corrosive ointment, and let it stay there until it corrodes the roughness, and then heal what is inside until it is healthy.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	Of the piercing of boils that come from below the tickling.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	These boils that come from below the tickling are of the species of scrofula, hard, and they contain a bag which is sac-like.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And some contain humidity; and those that contain humidity should be cut with a lunar incision according to this figure: from line G. to line B. And when everything has been evacuated from the boil of the pus, then you fill it with old bandages and let it be for another day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And then the bandage should be removed and healed with appropriate ointment, until it is healthy.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the boil of the species of knots and scrofula is, then you should split it as we have said in the section on scrofula.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	But if the wound extends so that it causes pus to flow out, then administer cauterization on it as we have already said.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	Of the incision of boils that occur through an artery or a vein.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an artery is broken and the vein is hardened which is above it, then many veins will break into the boil. And by the signs by which inflammation and boil are known to be caused by an artery or a vein: for when a boil is caused by an artery, it extends long in the body; and when you pierce the boil with your finger, you feel a stridor in it.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And what is caused by a vein is round to the appearance of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And an incision on this boil is error, and especially in one that is below the armpits, and in the armpits, and in the neck, and in many places of the body; and it is very large, so its cure with iron should be avoided, and what is in the extremities, or the head, should be evaded.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	But in one that is from them by inflammation of the orifice of the artery, split it into the vein with a long incision; and then open the incision with your nails and the artery, and release it from the membranes until it is uncovered.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And then place a needle on it and make it penetrate to the other side, and constrict the artery with a double thread in two places, which will cause you pain when pulling on both arteries that are in the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And then punch the place which is between two membranes until all the blood comes out of it, and the boil is dissolved.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then administer a cure in which pus is created until the membranes fall, and then heal it with appropriate ointments until it is healthy.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if it is a boil from the section of a vein, then you should hold with your hand what is possible of the boil with the vein, and then insert the needle below the place which you have held under your hand, and make it penetrate; and there will be a double thread in which you pull out that from the other side, and then tie the boil with good ligature according to what we have said to you in the ligature of the grape from two parts with two extremities of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	But if you are afraid to pull out the thread, then insert the needle with that needle below all the boil through the incision of the first needle, and constrict your threads in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Then dry the boil in its middle place until when it is dried up what is in it, then you split open the excess of the vein and let go what is tied to it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then place on it powder which you have soaked in wine and oil, and then administer the cure that is made with poultices and ointments until it is healthy.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Chapter 50 of the boil which occurs by twisting of nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	As it happens in an artery and a vein, and similarly happens to boils in nerves when they occur in them by impact or occurs due to superfluous heat, and similarly.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And it is made in the places of the helpers or the ankle, or any place where the joints are swollen.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And it is a heavy boil, and it resembles the color of the rest of the body, and in its greatest part there are bumps on it, and when it is constricted with vehemence, the patient feels a stupor in it.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And it is not a boil that extends into the body, and because of it, it is below the vein, and it is swollen in every part and does not go forward or backward.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, those which are in the joints should not be cauterized with iron, for they will cause strong contraction.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	But what is in the head or forehead, split open the vein with a needle.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	But if it is a small boil, then pierce it with your nails and cut off that from the roots.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is large, then suspend it with a hook, and cut it out, and then remove it; and sew the wound with sutures, and heal what is inside until it is healthy.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 51.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	Of the incision of a boil which occurs in the cheek that occurs in the belly.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	Some people have many times in their bellies and in other parts of the body those who are called by similarity to mushrooms, whose roots are subtle and the top is large; and already its lips are swollen, and it is small, and it is enlarged.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And you have seen one, and in his belly there were two bumps which were larger than mushroom-like bumps, and there was no difference between them, white, from the subtle root.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And already its lips were swollen and split, and moisture flowed out of it all the time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Therefore, you should cut them off and pierce them with a needle in the feet for 18 inches. and the other one, wine for an inch.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And the operation in their incision is that you consider if the patient is humid, and the color of the boil is white, humid, of subtle roots; then you split it with a needle, and when you open it, cauterize it in the fire, for many times due to the opening of it, pus is expelled; and if it bleeds, cauterize that.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if you see the patient is fearful and anxious, be careful not to begin with iron; but instead take fresh lead ore, and treat it with that fire, in the manner we have described; and let this be for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	Then tighten the lead wire around the ore, and keep twisting it tightly until it breaks apart and falls to the ground by itself.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	But if the ore is of a coarse nature, there is often some cause for fear and worry, especially when it is located in the belly.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	But you can perhaps split it in half, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And then care for the wound until it is healed.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	But be careful not to assume that you should split ore that is of a dusky colour, has little feeling, and is rigid; for this type of ore is cancerous.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And I will bring to mind some things now.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 52.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	On the curing of an umbilical hernia.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	An umbilical hernia is caused by several factors: either by fissures of the diaphragm which is located above the belly, or by a tear in the tissue or intestine, as already mentioned in other ruptures; or by blood that flows from a vein or artery, as previously stated; or by constricted bowel movement.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	But if it is caused by a tear in the diaphragm and by an injury to the tissue, then the colour of the swelling will be similar to that of the rest of the body; there will be little pain, and it will appear in various places.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it is caused by the egress of the intestine, then its location will be as we have described above, with greater or lesser intensity; and when you press it with your fingers, it conceals itself, and then returns; and it is very tender to the touch, and swells greatly with every movement of the body, and also due to warm baths and vigorous activity.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	But if it is caused by humidity, then there will be little pain, and it will not conceal itself when pressed with your hand, nor will it constrict or burst.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it is caused by blood, then dark-coloured marks will appear on the swelling.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	But if it is caused by a hernia of flesh, then there will be a large and hard swelling, as much as the amount of herniated flesh.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	But if it is caused by bowel movement, then touching it will hurt.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And in performing the operation, you must first consider whether the umbilical hernia is caused by blood from an artery or a vein, or by bowel movement; for if this is the case, you are to abstain from treating it, as I have instructed you in the chapter where I discussed hernias caused by arteries and veins.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the umbilical hernia is caused by the intestine or tissue, then you must command the patient to lie on his back, and remain stretched out; then you are to feel around the entire circumference of the umbilicus, and command him to raise himself up with his arms resting on your knees, and you are to surround the area around the umbilicus with a palm's breadth all around the location which you have felt with your fingers; then extend the length of the swelling upwards towards the ribcage, and bind it tightly all around with strong thread or with twine, in a decent manner.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And then open the middle of the extended swelling, and insert your finger into that opening, and feel for the intestine; and if you have captured it or kept it in place with the thread, then you are to pull gently and push the intestine back inside the belly.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have captured the tissue, then take it in your fingers, and cut away the excess.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	But if it is contrary to an artery or vein, then surround it greatly and return to your operation; take two needles and thread them with strong thread, and insert two needles into the opening all around the hernia in a cross shape, so that they penetrate; then tighten the hernia at four points around the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you wish, remove the needles and let the flesh return to its natural state and fall back by itself; or insert it when it has shrunk, and then care for it with a poultice so that it heals well.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the umbilical hernia is caused by a hernia of flesh or humidity, then you must hollow out the swelling as we have said, and draw out the blood or humidity which you have captured within it, and then care for it with what we have said so that it heals and solidifies.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 53.
De curacio de cranc.	On the cure for hernias.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have already said, in the division, about the kind of hernia and in what way it is treated with medicines, and that it is better to cure it with iron without ulceration; and we have also discussed hernias generated by mother and child, and the caution to be taken in curing them.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And the ancients say that sometimes hernias are found in places where it is possible to eradicate them entirely, such as hernias of the nipples or groin, and especially when they are small at first.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	But when it is old and large, you must not expect to cure it completely, for I have never seen such a thing happen, nor have I heard of any other case.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And in performing the operation, when it is located as we have said, you must first make him lie down and release his bowels, and then purge him of black bile several times; then cut short the hernia if there is evident swelling.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And then prepare the patient with a preparation in which he is to lie for the operation, and then pierce the hernia all around with uncut nails, and then press it in from all sides with a good, smooth knife so that no cause of the hernia remains.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And let the blood flow, and do not drain it too much, and squeeze out the places, and wipe away the blood all over with your hand or with an instrument which you have to hand; for there are instruments.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if you meet with strong blood flow from an artery or vein, then cauterize it so that the flow of blood ceases, and then care for it with the other cure so that it heals.
Capitol .liv.	Chapter 54.
De curacio de ydropici.	On the cure for hydrocephalus.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already recommended in the division about the kinds of hydrocephalus from water, and the signs of each kind, and their cure with medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And that which is cured with iron is only the kind of althitas alone, and it is not approached by iron to the kind of timpanites or to the kind of hyposarka, for these are deadly.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have treated this kind of hydrocephalus with medicines and your medicine does not bring relief, then consider, for if the patient has already become weak or is suffering from another hydrocephalus, as though it were in the head or chest and is similar to those, then be careful not to treat him with iron, for there is danger in that.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	But if you see the patient suffering from violent vertigo and he has no other ailment except hydrocephalus, and is not an infant or old man, then the way to cure him is to raise him up with his arms stretched out, and then squeeze his belly with your hand, pushing the water towards the groin, and then take a thorn-tipped stick according to this shape:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	It should be long on both sides, with an acute end like a spatula; but there must be some shortness in it little by little, so that in the operation it does not pass into the intestine, and that you take out that.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And consider if the generation of hydropsy is due to the intestines, then you should extend the incision from the navel downward by about three fingers' width on either side, along the length of his body toward his right side over the pubic bone.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	But if the generation of hydropsy is due to illness of the liver, then your incision should be left of the navel by about three fingers' width.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the generation is due to melting, then your incision should be on the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And you should not make your incision over the rib on which he wants to lie, so that fluids do not flow into that spot.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And with your instrument, pierce the whole vein, and enter into that incision and elevate your hand with the spatula between the vein and the artery, and you will drain it; if only the amount of a nail or so much.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And with your instrument pierce the artery until the spatula reaches the desired location and is the site of the water.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And extract that and insert an instrument whose shape is as follows:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	and it is similar to a slender silver tube; it is made of silver or brass or lion skin, and at the lower part of it there is a small hole, and on its sides are three holes: two on one side and one on the other side; and its end is split like a feather, thus:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And at the upper end of it is an eye, for when the instrument reaches the water, then that immediately drains onto the instrument, thus evacuating the water in a continuous quantity; for if you evacuate from that more than it receives in the hour, the patient will die by resolution of his animal spirit, or else it happens to him five-fold that death is near.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	But you should evacuate from that according to the quantity of his strength and according to what your examination of the patient's pulse and his goodness indicates to you.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And when you have extracted the instrument, then the water which causes it is retained by the vein because it is blocked by the hole that is over the artery of which and I recommend to you that you pierce that according to that manner.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And on the next day, repeat the instrument if the patient can tolerate it, and extract a little water each time, and do this for several days out of fear, and beware of errors lest you pierce the vein except for a few times.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	But if you are afraid for the patient and let out a great quantity of water, then treat him with hot sand bath and in bed rest for a long time; and cure him with drying medicines until he is healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And cauterize over the stomach, and the melting and liver especially when there is extraction of water, according to what I have recounted in that which precedes.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter .lv.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	Of the cure of children whose foreskin is not pierced.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Sometimes, some children are born from the womb of their mother and the foreskin of the penis is not pierced (or it is tightly drawn or not in its place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, you should treat him with piercing of that immediately after he is born with a very slender spatula according to this form:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And with the spatula, pierce the foreskin at its middle. And put into the slit a slender pin of lead and tie that; and let it be for three days or for four.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when he wants to urinate, he should strain and urinate; and then return that.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not put in the pin, it is possible that the urine which goes over the place will not harm this closure.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	But he of whom the slit is tight should be treated with a pin of lead, as we have said, for several days until it is enlarged.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	But those in whom the slit is not in its place, they are hurt, which cause is that from them, he who is born and the foreskin is drawn down to the end of the penis so that he cannot urinate into the parts within, and there is no generation, because the semen cannot reach the mother according to rectitude, and it is a great illness.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	And the manner of the operation on him is that the patient be turned onto his back, and then extend the foreskin of his penis with your left hand with violent stretching, and pierce the end of the foreskin at its tip with a sharp spatula, thus as a feather is pierced, or you scrape away any part, so that the foreskin comes to resemble the shape of the penis and the slit falls into its proper place according to what it should.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And beware of letting out blood in your operation, for often this happens; and let him take something that stops the bleeding, and cure the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter .lvi.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	Of whitlow which happens in the foreskin at the end of the penis and of hardening and blackness and adhesion of the foreskin over the end of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Often this whitlow happens in the penis and is an excess of flesh there.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And one of them is malignant, and the other is non-malignant.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	Non-malignant, that you suspend with a slender hook and drain it until it is all out; then put on that cut, smeared with Egyptian ointment; and let him wear that, cure with ointment dayfinicon until it is healed.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the whitlow is malignant, of pale colour, then you should administer cautery over its incision and its root.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	But if the whitlow is in the foreskin at the end of the penis not circumcised, and one part of the whitlow is within the foreskin and the other part is without, then you should treat the whitlow which is within first so that it is consolidated; and then you cure the hole, for when you cure both together, it is not assured that there will be no recurrence.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And if you see happening in the glans and in the foreskin blackness and hardening, then you should cut away all that which is already blackened and that which is starting to corrupt or that which is already corrupted; and then rub over that with honey, which is pounded from bran of grape-pits and sifted.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And let him cure that with the other cure until it is healed.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	But if blood flows out, then administer lunar cautery according to this form:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	For lunar cautery is useful in two dispositions at once, that is for flow of blood and for the wound when it is corrupted.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the end of the penis is corroded and destroyed entirely in the hour, then you should insert into the foreskin a tube of lead so that the patient urinates through that.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adhesion of the foreskin with the end of the penis  (and this adhesion does not happen except in him whose foreskin is cut, and on it circumcision is not required; and when adhesion happens by plague or by blister) let you pierce with a blunt spatula until the binding is dissolved and the end of the penis is freed entirely.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	If it is difficult to pull them off gently, then you should cut away some skin from the head of the penis and foreskin, because the foreskin, when it is thin, is easily pierced by its own thinness.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	Then separate the foreskin from the head of the penis with a damp cloth so that they do not adhere again.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And then let it be treated with a styptic until it is healed.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter 57:
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	Of the purification of children, and of the cure of those who are circumcised.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not the same as other wounds; rather, since it comes from our own action and will, and since its use is especially in children, we must consider in that case which operation and way is most quick and beneficial to health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore I say that the ancients did not prescribe circumcision to any of their freemen, for they do not use it in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired it by experience, which reason is that I have found most of the barbers and surgeons to use circumcision and purification with a razor and cauteries; and they use ointment with pitch and incision with the nail.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And if any wound of the nature of the body occurs to those who are circumcised, it behooves to cure them with a styptic and cauteries of hot iron; and if it is necessary, let a pointed cautery be done on the surface of the foot. And I have forbidden all these ways and not found a better purification with tweezers, or ointment with pitch, which is used in purification with the nail, because many times the membrane above has escaped, since the membrane of the foreskin has two tunics, and the inner one remains below, and it is easily forced to another incision and sure pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And wounds which occur to those who are circumcised from the nature of their body need to be cured, for which reason these wounds are made; and if they cannot be cured with a styptic or cauteries of hot iron, let a pointed cautery be done on the surface of the foot. And by purification which is made with alpecat, which is digitalis, which surgeons use, the incision to the end of the virile member is not secure, because it soon enters its passage.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	But in the operation with the nail, iron often obstructs and corrupts your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the membrane of the infant is short by nature, and many times it happens in such a way that there is no need for purification, and I have seen this happen.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	But of the purification which is made with tweezers and ointments with pitch, I have discovered the goodness by experiment, because the tweezers are of proportional incision, for this reason that the acuteness above is thus with the acuteness below; and therefore when you press your hand it is proportioned two acutenesses, and you make a cut according to a comparison in one time; and compression of the pitch is made with the figure containing the membrane of the penis throughout its whole part, with which there occurs no error at all.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the manner of the first operation is that you make the infant be most upright if he is one who is a little bit small, so that you do not but that you smear the pitch on his penis only, and that you let him go until the next day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And then let him be cheerful in all that way which is possible for you to receive his intelligence.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And then let him be between your hands, setting out preparingly, and do not be careless; and conceal the tweezers in your hand or under your foot so that the infant does not see those or any other of the instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And then put your hand on his penis and blow into the membrane, and draw that in so that the head of the penis is exited, and then purify that from what is gathered in it from dirtiness.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And then smear the marked place with pitch doubled over, and then ligature lower from that a little the second ointment, and then put your finger in the place of the ointment below with good retention, and make an incision between two ointments.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then lift up the membrane a little and stretch out the head of the penis; and let the blood flow a little and a little, because it is better; and put powder over that and over the powder place a cloth in which is spread the gum of black mastic in rose oil recently boiled hot; and leave that on that until the next day; and cure that with cure until it is healed.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The form of the tweezers to purification is this form:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	Let the ends not be cut and the others be cut, so that the point of the claw is not exited, and let the length of the two acutenesses be thus with the length of two handles equally.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	But the error in purification is because the membrane which is inside entirely escapes, or it is separated from him after the incision.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore you should lengthen that from your finger in front of the end of the place and that you make that according to equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it with your finger, then pull it out with tweezers and insert that instead.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	But if three days have passed and the swelling has not gone down, then you should let the abscess burst so that the pus can come out easily, then scrape away the dead skin and insert something to aid healing.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And be careful with the head of the penis, for it should not be harmed.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And then treat the wound with the powders we listed in the treatise on powders to promote healing.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it is cut below the foreskin and follows the natural lines, it will not be noticed.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the wound as we have said so that it may heal.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter 58:
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retained urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction due to a stone, or blood clot, or inflammation, or growths, and is treated similarly as we have said before in the section on treatments.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not eliminated and there is retention due to a stone that has moved into the neck of the bladder, then you should make the patient bend over backwards.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	Then place the patient's feet on something elevated and bent backwards, extending his abdomen and tilting his pelvis forward as far as is comfortable.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Thus the neck of the bladder is narrowed and the stone is expelled through the opening at the back, allowing the urine to flow out.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if the cause is not eliminated with what we have said and there is strong inflammation in the patient, then you should administer extraction with an instrument called a syringe. Its form is as follows: it should be made of silver and quite flexible, like a reed cut from the stem of an owl, about one and a half inches long, with a narrow tube at its tip made from a peacock feather, also about an inch long, with a slender cane attached to its end.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the way to extract urine with it is to take the folded needle and tie wool or cloth around its end; then insert the ends of the needle into the opening below the syringe, and cut away any excess wool with tweezers, but insert the cane into the tube with force. Then fill the syringe with egg white and oil.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And let the patient lie on his back, and pierce his bladder and penis with the syringe, using lubricants such as olive oil and vinegar.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	Then insert the syringe easily into the urethra until it reaches the root of the penis; then bend the penis upwards at its tip; and squeeze the syringe inside that, until it reaches the bladder, and when the patient feels the void is reached, and if nothing else is done in this order, but the cause is met with resistance.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	Then slowly pull the needle out with the wool, because the urine will follow the wool.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Then extract the needle and treat the urine, using the syringe; do not stop doing this until the bladder is emptied and the patient feels relief.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter 59:
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	On the quality of enema for the bladder with camphor and similar instruments that are suitable for this.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When there is ulceration or an abscess, or blood clot in the bladder, and you want to distil waters and medicines into it, then use an instrument called a camphor needle, and its form is as follows:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	except that at its tip it is blunt, so it is closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that there are three holes: two from one end, like a needle.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	At its beginning there is a concave section, in which the medicine is inserted; and it should be according to the quantity that oppilates that medicine, without addition, so that when any cause draws moisture from the bladder, it is drawn in, and when it is expelled, with that medicine it is drawn in, and when it is expelled far, according to how the camphor needle phycates naphtha on sea battles.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	Thus when you want to inject moisture into the bladder, insert the tip of the clapcedra into the moisture, and draw with that what is pushed from above, because the moisture is drawn into the cavity of the clapcedra.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	Then insert the tip of the clapcedra into the penis as we have recommended with the syringe; and squeeze the moisture with what you squeeze it with, because that moisture immediately reaches the bladder, and the patient feels it.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	Subtle form of a clyster through which the bladder is clystered, and its form is as follows:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And it should be made of silver or brass; its tip should be like a small feather, and below that there is a tube inside the shaft.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	Then grasp the bladder with force and insert into it the moisture you want to inject into the bladder; then tie that between two with strong ligature with a doubled needle, and heat that moisture over the fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	Then insert the tip of the clyster into the penis.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And then squeeze your hand over the bladder with pressure and push down until the patient feels that moisture has reached the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	But if you do not have a bladder, then take a bag of parchment and make a circle; and pierce that all around its circumference; then insert the needle strongly into those holes, in such a way that it rotates; then add the circle just as you would alsofatur, after you have paused in that what you want of moisture, oils, and waters.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	Then you squeeze that in the instrument and do with it as you have done with the bladder, and express with your hand until moisture reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Chapter 60:
De extraccio de peyra.	On the extraction of a stone.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already said in the section on the species of stones and their treatment with medicines, and the difference between a stone formed in the kidneys and a stone formed in the bladder, and their signs.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have said about a stone for which lithotomy is performed, and incision.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And the stone formed in the bladder properly is that which is lodged in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And they describe it with obvious exposure and abbreviation.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore they say that a stone formed in the bladder mostly affects children; and its signs are that the urine expelled from the bladder is like water in its thinness, and it has sand; and the patient rubs his penis, and goes several times to the toilet; and then there is pain in the anus.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And it is easier to cure in children who have reached 12 years; and it is difficult to treat in the elderly.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	But in the young it is mild for what it is among them.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And if the stone is large and the treatment is easier; and if it is small, it is contrary to that.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore when you come to the treatment of that, then at the beginning of that clean the patient with a clyster which extracts the whole slit which is in his intestines; because that slit sometimes prevents the expulsion of the stone through probing it.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	Then grasp the patient by the feet and make him bend down so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, or he jumps in place several times.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	Then make that incision between your fingers prepared, and their hands beneath the things of him, so that the bladder is all made declining to the parts below.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And then around that and all around that outside.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	Then if you feel the stone in the space, then you immediately cut into it.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you don't get it all the way down your touch, then cover that with oil your index finger of the left hand if the patient is an infant or the middle finger if they are a fully grown young man, and insert that into their anus.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And around the stone, let it stay below your finger.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And turn that little by little into the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	Then press on that with your finger and expel that to the outside parts way down from where you made the incision.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And order the assistant to press the bladder with their hand; and order another assistant that, with their right hand, extend the genitals up above, and with their other hand rub the umbilical cord which is below the genitals, in the area where the incision is made.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Then insert a sponge in an incident which this is the shape of it:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	and cut into it the water that is between the anus and genitals, not in the middle place, towards the left thigh; and let the incision be over that stone and your finger be in the anus, and let the incision be transverse, so that the outside cut be wide and the inside tight according to how much of the stone is able to be expelled to him, and no more, for the finger which is in the anus will press it strongly after the incision, and it will be driven out without difficulty.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And know that of the stone there is some which has an angle and edges, making its excretion difficult because of this.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And of that one is lion-like in shape, round, and its excretion is made easy.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	So if it is the one with angles and edges, fit into the fissure.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not driven out, then cover that with oil, or press on that with a decent gesture, the end of which be like a file with which you press on the stone, or insert below it a subtle instrument with a curved end.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	But if you cannot press on it, then increase the cut a little, and if you see a flow of blood, bind that tightly with vinegar and trass.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	But if the stone is more than one, then at the beginning push your hand to the mouth of the bladder, and then insert it a little; and do likewise if there are more than two.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if the stone is very large, then it is ignorance to insert that with a great cut, for two causes accrue to the patient: either he will die or suffer continuous drip of urine, because the area is not entirely consolidated.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	But let the assistant expel it when it is driven out, or pull at the fracture of it with forceps so that he draws it out in pieces.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	So when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with poultices of aloe and dragon's blood, and bind that tightly.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And place over that a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in rose oil and water rubbed together, so that the wound may heal.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	Then bind up the patient around his waist, and do not loosen the binding until the third day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when you have loosened it, wash the area with water and a little oil, and cure that with ointment of diaphoretic and diabasic ointment until it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	But if in the wound occurs cauterization and corrosion, and it is like that as though the blood is frozen in the bladder, and because of it there is the prohibition of urine (and this is known from the going out of blood with urine), then insert your finger into the wound and draw out that blood, for if it remains it provokes corruption of the bladder and putrefaction.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then wash the wound with sour wine, water and salt, and apply an ointment of all spices until it is healed.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And take care during all the hours of the cure that you press both thighs and fix the remedies which are placed over the wound.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the stone is small and it is in the middle of the penis, and excretion of urine is prohibited, then cure that with what you know before you make an incision, for remedies brought on by this cure are accused of causing incision; and now we have tried that, and it is that you take a punch made of iron felt, of which this is the shape:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	of triangular end, pointed, put in a handle.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	Then take a needle and pierce the penis with it below the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	Then insert the iron into the penis, piercing it with ease until the punch comes against the stone.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And revolve the punch with your hand in that stone little by little, and pierce it from the other side so that you make a passage for it; for the urine is then absorbed immediately.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	Then press your hand on that which is broken from the stone in the part of the forepart of the penis; for that is tight, and is driven out with urine, and the patient is healed.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	But if this cure is not equipped for some cause which prohibits that, then pierce a needle below the stone, and another needle above the stone.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	Then close in on the stone in that penis between two ligatures.
E aprop extratz aquela.	Then pull that out.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	Then loosen the binding and clean off the clotted blood which is made in the wound.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And the binding of needle below the stone is not necessary except that it does not return to the bladder; and the other binding above unless because when the needle is loosened the going out of the stone, the wound returns to its place and heals.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And for that it is necessary when you tie the needle above, that you raise the umbilical cord to the upper parts or that it returns because of your command, and the wound heals thus as we have said.
Capitol .lxi.	CHAPTER.LXI.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	Of extraction of stone from women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Stone in women is seldom found.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	But if you see stone in one of them, then the cure of it is difficult, and is prohibited by many means.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of them is that the woman is very young.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second is that you do not find a woman who knows how to discover if she has been with a man when she is chaste, or it is of women having been married.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third is that you do not find a woman who knows this art, most especially the operation with the hand.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth is that the place of incision on stone in women is distant from the place of the stone, for it induces long incision, and in that there is fear.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	But if necessity compels you to that, then take a woman who knows this, and she is seldom found.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	But if you are deprived of that, then seek needle which is quest and subtle, or present a woman midwife experienced in the nature of women, or a woman who has had children.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Then perform this examination and command him to do everything you tell him, beginning with the inquiry about the stone; which cause is that he should look whether the woman is a virgin, then put his finger into his anus and feel for the stone.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Then if he finds it, hold it under his finger, and then command him to piss over it.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	But if he is not a virgin, then command the midwife to put her finger into the vagina of the patient and feel for the stone, while putting her left hand over the bladder, and press it with good compression.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Then if he finds it, then gradually push that from the opening of the bladder to the parts down with the summit of his power until he reaches it at the root of the thigh.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	Then piss over that spot on the vagina opposite the root of the thigh from whichever side it is on, and push the stone to that spot, and his finger should not be pushed out by the stone.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the incision should be small at first; and then put the probe into that incision, and if he feels the stone, then cut in sections according to the quantity which he knows that the stone will fit into.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And know that the species of stones are many: some are small and large, sharp and smooth, long and round, and have horns.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Then you should know how many species there are for what you intend to do.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you want to cause blood flow, apply tripe cut into pieces and put it on the wound for an hour until the blood is drained out, then return to your operation so that the stone can be pushed out.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And prepare for yourself some instruments which are used in the extraction of stones in men, so that you may be helped by them in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you want to cause blood flow, and know that the origin of the bleeding is from an artery which is cut, then put powder on the spot and stop it up with lint and compression; do not repeat this, leave the stone and do not extract it, for the patient will surely die.
E aprop cura la plagua.	And then heal the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	Then when the keenness of the bleeding is decreased and the spot becomes puffy, then return to your operation so that the stone is pushed out.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter 62.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	Of incision upon a protruding hernia.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	A protruding hernia is nothing but an accumulation of moisture in the white membrane which is beneath the cords of the intestines containing the bowels, and it is called the ciphacus.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And in some cases it is in the upper membrane which nature has prepared in the part of the bowels, where there is a different bowel; and it is the cord of the intestine between the white ciphacus which we have mentioned, and it is not anything but fat.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness which happens to the intestines, because that matter is poured into them; and sometimes it happens due to a blow made upon the intestines.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this moisture has many colors, for its hue is either inclining towards yellow or blood-red, or red, or it is dark and mud-like, or it is watery white, and that is what is most common.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which one knows that this accumulation of water is in the white ciphacus which we have mentioned are these: for if it is in the white ciphacus, then the ulcer is round declining a little towards length with the shape of a bowel, and it appears on the intestine, for the moisture contains that of all parts.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the moisture is in the upper membrane, then the ulcer is round with the part of the bowel, and because of that one thinks that it is another bowel.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the moisture is between the cords of the intestines and the white ciphacus, then cut beneath the middle.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And when you want to know the hue of the moisture, then probe the hue of the moisture in the ulcer with a hot needle whose form is preceded; and according to what comes out on the track of the needle, judge what is inside it.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	Therefore when we come to the cure of it with iron, then command the patient to be bled if that is possible for you, and warm the body of him.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And then let him lie on his back for some cause a little while, and put under him many cloths.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And then sit on the left side of him, and command the assistant to stand on his right, who extends his finger to one of two sides at the cords of the intestines and to the part of the navel.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And then take a flat needle and split the cords of the intestines from that middle place along for the length until it reaches the penis.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And the incision is made according to the directness equally distant from the line which passes through the hair of the intestines, so that it reaches the white ciphacus containing it.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And cut it, and examine, and watch out so that you do not push into it; and your cutting with which you cut it by part according to the amount that is possible for you to examine it.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	And then pierce the full ciphacus of water with a wide incision, and extract all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	And then separate between two lips of the incision with pincers, and extend the ciphacus to the parts above; and do not touch the cords of the intestines containing it, and cut the ciphacus in that manner that is possible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And cut it in its entirety or in pieces, and especially the sides of it sottilely, for if you do not examine the incision of it carefully, there is no security that the water will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	But if the bowels process from that hole of its cords in the hour of your operation, then when you have completed the incision of the ciphacus, return it inside, and then sew together the two lips of the cords of the intestines, and then heal that as well as the other wounds, so that it is healed.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you find the bowels putrefied due to another disease, then lie the vessels which are on the suspensory, and extract the bowels, and then heal that as we have said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	But if the water is accumulated in two parts, then know that there are two hernias; therefore cut that part according to how you have done it in the other equally; and if it is possible for you to do one operation, then do it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And then you should wipe away the blood, and put into the incisions wool which is submerged in oil or in rose oil; and lay another wool which you have submerged in wine and oil, and spread that over both intestines and the navel; and put over it folded cloths and lint, and tie those over with bandages according to that form:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	and then put on two cloths and they are folded with wool which is dyed according to that appearance; and the extremities are made with which it is bound with a thread or with wet wool, and let them be joined with compression in the band of the trousers, and one of the extremities pierces the anus towards two, and the second pierces at the part of the foreskin, and two extremities over two thighs below and two extremities over two angles, and all compression is adjusted in the band of the trousers.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with cautery instead of cutting with iron; and you should take a sottile cutlass cautery and insert it into the groin, and ignite it according to our recommendation while the white capsule containing water is exposed; then you take the cautery in this way:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	it resembles greek letters.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	Then pierce the capsule and ignite it until all moisture is driven out.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	Then stretch the capsule with tongs, and scrape it with tongs, and scrape it with a sottile cautery ignited, and insert it according to what is possible for you until you have removed all of it; and beware that the fire does not touch you.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And know that this operation is much safer and much more distant from blood flow, and better than an operation with cutting.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	But if you are bothered by an abscess during cutting or during cautery, or by blood flow, then cure which ever disturbance occurs to you by that, with treatment according to what is said.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	But if the patient is fearful and does not hope for the second operation because of its horribleness, then you should administer piercing according to what I have recommended here; and it is when you are certain that you must, by what we have said about the significants, that this hernia is watery.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Then you should cause the patient to lie on his back on some elevated surface; then pierce the abscess in its lowest part with a wide spatula, and make the piercing according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And let the aperture be ample so that all the water can flow out.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	Then stop up the hole and apply pressure to it with a cloth, both above and below, so that the remaining water will flow out.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	Then heal this until the wound is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	But if a disturbance occurs to the flow of water at that time when you pierce it: and this does not occur except because the white membrane in the orifice of the wound causes disturbance and prohibits the flow of water, then you should insert into the wound a rod or instrument with which the water is extracted from the hernia; or apply pressure on the hernia with a small rod.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And know that the water returns and is retained for a few months or around one year; and when it is retained, then let it be pierced according to that same method, for the patient will thus pass his days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter .63.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	On cutting on a fleshy hernia and its treatment.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	Know that in cutting on this hernia there is great fear of danger in the more common dispositions, because I have seen its dismissal and saving by that better way.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And I am recalling the operation on that one and the species of the abscesses.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore I say that abscesses arise in the parts of which the genitals are composed and are caused by several causes: either by acute sharp excess, which is distributed to the genitals, or by impact.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And its color is according to the color of the body, and it does not cause pain in that place, and it is a serious abscess.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And often it is a calcified abscess, of which the color is dusky, and there is no feeling in it.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And sometimes it is caused by knotting of the vessels and by inflammation of those as a result of which there is already perceived an impression of it, or by inflammation of the veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	But that which is caused by inflammation of the vessels is known by the dispersion of the abscess when you compress it with your fingers; and it does not cause pain when touched.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	But that which is caused by inflammation of a vein is not dispersed by any cause because of compression with the fingers.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that on this species there be made a cut and on the other meats; and you should insert into the groin of the genitals, and open up the hollows above them, and extract the contents of the white capsule, and ligate the suspenders of the vessels, and insert the suspender further in so that you have emptied it of all its parts.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Therefore if the hernia is already consolidated with those meats, then you should extract the hernia and insert it.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is adhesiveness for some cause of the capsule, or between what is between the vessels, then you should loosen all that adhesiveness and insert it by a round incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	But if there is flesh growing in the place of the adhesiveness which is behind, then you should insert all that is in it and extract the hernia as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Therefore when your operation is completed, then fill the wound with wool soaked in rose oil and wine, and heal it with that other treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter .64.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	On the treatment of a hernia that is of veins.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	Veins are an abscess enveloped by some envelopment similar to swelling with softening of the testicles; and it causes difficult movement exercise and ambulation on the patient.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the treatment of this illness there is fear for that of which there is a previous memory.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, let us proceed with operation on it according to what we have said first.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And I say that you should cause the patient to lie on his back on an elevated surface; then tighten the suspenders of the testicles from below; and you touch the groin of the genitals with your fingers at the veins that are felt to the shaft; and have those others assist you, and extend them with violent extension.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	Then insert with a wide spatula through the vein by cross cut in the right of the vessels so that the vessels are exposed.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And then scrape it off from every part as we have said in extraction of the veins which are in the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And then insert into it an awl in which is a double thread, and stop it up at the beginning of the places in which veins occur, and stop it up again with another plug in the back of them.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	Then insert those into the middle place by cross cut according to the length of the body, and extract what is accumulated of foul and corrupt moisture.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And then heal the wound with treatment of other wounds in which there is desire for the generation of the veins by which one testicle falls into two genitals, for it is not bad for that.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	But if veins occur in all the vessels, then you should extract the testicles or that the testicles be separated from the vessels so that it is deprived of all nourishment by the incision of the vessels, and they are dried up, or that it is separated from them for that cause.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter .65.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	On the treatment of intestinal hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The advent of this hernia is by incision that extends in the hollow over the belly from parts of the anus of the belly, because loosening the sacs of that rupture towards some of the sacs.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture is either of the capsule or of the sac; and these two species occur for several causes: either by impact, or by drops, or by noise, or by elevation of some cause serious, or by similitude.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	And the sign of that, when it is by extension of the capsule, is that it occurs little by little in a long time, and does not occur suddenly, and it is an abscess that enfolds within the sac so that the capsule compresses the sac.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the sign of it is when there is a cut on the head, for at first it causes violent pain suddenly; and there is an apparent pustule beneath the skin, and this is due to the hernia coming out through the opening in the head.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And sometimes the intestine has slipped out of its covering, and this hernia is called intestinal hernia.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And sometimes it is caused by windiness, and sometimes the intestine splits open and there it is retained, and this is a great harm to the patient; and sometimes it causes terrible pain especially when pressed upon.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the treatment of this illness one must be wary of using iron because it is likely to cause damage in that place.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And the way to perform the operation on this is to command the patient to withdraw the intestine with his hand to its openings inside his cavity if he obeys its return, and then to have him lean back between your hands and raise his legs.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And then tighten the scrotum which closes the scrotum of the testicles at its upper openings, and insert the testicles all along its length; and press on two lips of the incision with hooks according to how you direct them to open the incision with those.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if the incision according to the amount that is possible for you, then may some of that hernia have slipped out.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And then scrape away the brain matter which is beneath the scrotum of the testicles, while the white hard brain at each opening is exposed.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	And then you insert your finger into that which closes the testicle, into that which is between the white brain and the scrotum of the hernia; and clean away with that adhesion which is in the opening behind the hernia.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And then stretch the scrotum of the testicles at its openings, and with the left hand stretch out the white brain to the sides, and lift up the hernia with the brain to the opening of the incision; and command a minister to stretch the hernia out and you dissolve the adhesion which is behind with a complete solution.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And check with your fingers that there is no cause for the intestine to be wrapped up in the white hard brain.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	But if you find any cause from him, then you cover it with a cloth beneath his belly.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And then you take a needle in which is a large thread made of six threads, and insert that behind the scrotum at its opening which closes the scrotum of the hernia; and then insert the ends which are emerging from the thread so that they are four threads, and tie some of them into a cross; and sew to it the scrotum of which we have said is beneath the testicles with strong sewing in two parts.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And then wrap up the ends of the threads and sew those with violent sewing so that none of the vessels which inflame those can pass through any cause for apostemata to occur there again.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And place another sewing beneath the first sewing, distant from it by three fingers; and these two sewings will leave of the scrotum which is beneath the testicles the quantity of the greatness of a finger, and insert the remainder according to roundness, and prevent the hernia there.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And then insert in the opening beneath the scrotum of the testicles through which blood and pus flow as we have described before.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And then administer wool soaked in oil, and place it on the wound; and administer the sewing which we have recommended (and sometimes the white brain is cauterized which we have said before the incision of it fear the flow of blood because in many times they occur there) and leave the sewing so that by itself it falls.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	But if the healing of it is delayed then oil should be applied to the water and placed on that so that it falls according to what we have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the wound with the other cure of wounds until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter .lxxxvi.
De hernia ventosa.	Of intestinal hernia.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia I have not seen anyone who has been healed by its treatment with iron.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first one said that it is made like we have recommended in the hernia which is with wine; and the other is to sew the vessels above the incision on that with ease of it; and then dry in the middle place around it as you open the apostema with what causes it, while the vessels fall.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And cure the wound according to what we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter .lxxxvii.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	Of the separation that is made in the joints.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Sometimes there is a rupture in the joints as we have said and it emerges from the place.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And do not let any cause of the intestines come to the genitals; and if it comes it is little; and return in all hours.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	But if the time is prolonged with that then it is a fissure in the brain which extends from the scrotum into the brain; and this happens because of the extension of the brain which is in the joints as we have said, and then it becomes soft and the place is apostemata and emerges.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And its cure is with cautery like that which precedes its narration.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And sometimes it is cured with iron in this way: and the patient leans on his back between your hands, and then dry the place of the rupture of the apostemata which emerges with an incision according to the length of three fingers.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then strengthen the white brain which is beneath the scrotum so that it is exposed.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And then take the thread and place that over the prominent place of the brain, and press that against the bone of the belly.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And then cut the two prominent places over the extremity of the thread of the brain, and join with sewing one of those to the other.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And then cut off the extremity of the thread, and do not insert from the brain at all, nor stretch out the hernia, nor another cause as you have come to know in the cure of intestinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And then cure that with the cure of wounds, and when you insert the threads, cleanse that and restore the wound until it is consolidated; because the brain is contracted and not adjusted to the eminence of the rupture.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cautery is better in this place because it is closer to health.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter .lxxxviii.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	Of softening of the scrotum of the testicles.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	Many times the scrotum of the testicles in some men is softened because the flesh which is between that is softened, and is felt the guarding of it.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Then it is necessary for him who is treated in the cure of it that he makes lean the patient according to his back, and insert all the scrotum which is softened over the natural scrotum; and then sew two lips with sewing.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you want in the beginning the superfluity of the softened scrotum with three or four cuts and with firm sewing.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And then insert between the sutures; and then cure by the cure of the other wounds until it is healed and the threads fall.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter .xc.
De castracio.	Of emasculation.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	I know that emasculation in our law is forbidden but to me it has been revealed to me that I remind you of it in this book; and it is not necessary for its reminder except for two ways, from which there is one so that that happens in the science of medicine when he is questioned about it, who knows the cure of it to which it happens; and the other way is that we have many times needed emasculation of other animals for our young ones by those, as of horses, and of oxen, and of pigs, and of like things to the animals.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And so I say that castration is performed in two ways: either by crushing or by cutting with a blade.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	However, in the method where castration is performed by crushing, the procedure is to have the animal lie down in a body of water so that its genitals become soft and droop and hang down.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	Then hold those with your hand so they are resolute and do not appear below the touch.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	However, in castration performed by cutting and slicing, one must have the animal and press the cord of its testicles with the left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	Then tie the scrotum, and cut through each pair of testicles so that two pieces are produced.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	Then cut those again once you have skinned them.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not let any cause remain over those of the brain, but the subtle brain which is over the vessels.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this method of castration is better which is performed by crushing because strong crushing will leave no cause from the testicles for the animal to desire sex.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	Then treat the wound so that it may heal.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter 70.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	Of the cure for hermaphrodites.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphrodites in men occur according to two methods: the first is where there appears to be a space in the cord of testicles, in that which is between two testicles the shape of a female vulva; and also where there is an opening between the penis and the anus from which white fluid flows.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And sometimes urine comes out of that which is in the cord of the testicles.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	But in women it is unique: and that the clitoris of a woman on the penis is like two testicles of a man a little bit at the entrance of the vagina just like the foreskin of a man and two testicles.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the cure is of three species: two from men and one species from women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And it is that you cut into those tight meats so that the fluid of that flows out, and then cure those with treatment for the other wounds.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second species of men from whom urine flows from that which is in the cord of the testicles, there is no cure nor operation on him.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 71.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	Of menstruation and of prominent meats due to causes in women.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	Strong menstruation is constricted due to natural causes so that it is pressed and made short, the womb being guarded; and sometimes it is magnified in some women as much as in men and pervades into sexual intercourse.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Therefore you must have the superfluity of menstruation cut with your hand or with a knife, and cut it.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not cut deeply, especially in the vein of the artery, so that blood does not flow out.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	Then cure that with treatment for wounds so it may heal.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	But a growth is meat that grows in the womb of the mother and fills it up, and often appears at the openings of the vagina according to the appearance of a penis (and for this reason some first called it “tailed hermaphrodite”); therefore we must cut it as we cut menstruation, and cure it so it may heal.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter 72.
De curacio de alratica.	Of the cure of hernia.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Hernia is when the clitoris of a woman is not perforated or is small.
E es o natural o accidental.	It can be natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental is through disease which has preceded it, and that is caused by meat growing constricted or by subtle brain or thick.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	And it is caused in the womb of the mother or in her ribs or on top of them or at the bottom of her, and prohibits coitus and impregnation and menstruation, and often prohibits urination as well.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	And the knowledge of it is caused by observation of the midwife, if the swelling is apparent then you check it with your fingers or with a needle; but if it is not apparent then you pierce it with your fingers or with a needle.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	But if the swelling is due to subtle brain and is close to the two lips then you cut it and break it up.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And that is so that you may pause over the two lips with your fingers and also place your fingers on both sides of the mouth to hold it shut.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the woman should be on her back with her legs spread out and you also spread the two lips with force so that the subtle brain is broken up and the swelling is opened.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And then take wool and dip it in oil and place it on the wound, and apply a poultice every day so that the wound does not close up.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	But if the brain is thick and dense then you must cut it with spatium or with myrrh oil.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	But if the swelling is caused by growth then suspend it with a needle and cut it up.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And they are the medicines which stop the flow of blood without biting like ahauca and dragon's blood and gum arabic bound with egg white.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And then administer a broad lead rod so that the wound does not heal up quickly.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And keep it for several days and administer hot water from the lyre.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	Then it will be healed by other healing methods of consolidation so that it may heal up.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And sometimes they occur in the womb due to the occurrence of other meats and then you must cut according to this method.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	But if it is due to an ulcerated wound in the womb which has not been made contrary by iron in any way.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter 73.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	Of the cure for hemorrhoids and of a tail and of red botches which occur in the clitoris of women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids are the appearance of the orifices of many veins from which there flows from them continuous blood; and when hemorrhoids are old and they have become enlarged and swollen.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And I have already mentioned the species of those and their signs, and I shall now mention those which received cure and also those who did not receive cure.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore I say that hemorrhoids and theyls when they are in the womb and do not appear to be felt, then in those there shall not be made cure with iron.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	But those which are in the orifices of the womb upon which one feels heat, then they must be cured.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And you must put the woman in a warm bath and then extend the hemorrhoids with tweezers or with an asp, and cut those with scissors.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And then powder the hemorrhoids with one of the powders which stop the flow of blood by biting like ahauca and like its similar to those.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And then pluck her feet for an hour, and then place her in warm water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the flow of blood persists then let her drink a decoction of sumac and of husks of pomegranates and of hulls and of similar things.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And then take flour of bran and comb that hemorrhoid with honey and sour wine and make a poultice with it over the hemorrhoid.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the blood is scanty then let her drink a mixture of honey and vinegar; but if not, then have her sit in a bath between two hot stones, and on the hemorrhoid apply escarification with a needle.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then take wool and dip that in the juice of colander or in the juice of henna or in the juice of holly and let her drink wine that has been cooked with it, and apply it to the hemorrhoid; and then cure the wound so that it may heal up.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	And then the noble king, who was very stern in his demeanor, instructed you to insert that which appeared to you according to what I have said in that same treatment.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And cure that interior part so that it heals.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter 74:
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	Of piercing a ulcerated wound in the head.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	[The following is a list of diseases and conditions that can affect the head:] Diseases of pustules and abscesses occurring in the head, like cranial abscesses, pustular ulcers, suppurative inflammation, herpes zoster, fistulas, blood clots, and other abscesses.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already spoken of these diseases and their types and characteristics, as well as their treatments in the previous divisions.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	Now we will discuss treatments for the head. [And I will tell you in this treatise about an abscess that appears on the head, which is among the types of abscesses that drain pus. And if you want to know how to perform the incision using a hot iron:]
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	So you must consider if the pain of the abscess at its onset is sharp with percussion, phlegm, and fever, and if it becomes inflamed and if pus forms on top of it, then do not open it with an incision; instead, treat it with something that aids in ripening until the acute symptoms subside.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	If you find that the abscess causes pus and phlegm, and if it hurts with percussion but does not form a lump on top of it, then this abscess is not ripe.  [So you should make the woman lie down on her side with two pillows; recline on your back and elevate your feet to the lowest part of your abdomen, and let your thighs be spread apart, and rest your arms below your elbows, and lean forward at a comfortable angle.]
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	Then the midwife should follow the right side and administer the instrument through which the opening in the head will be made, the form of which will depend on the causes that are presented.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And as you lean forward at a comfortable angle, follow the right side and administer the instrument through the opening in the head; and when you want to administer this instrument, make sure that your finger on the woman's forehead is pressed against it, and what enters the head from the instrument should not go deeper than your finger and press against the patient.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	But if the instrument is larger than the opening in the head, then you should place cotton on the texture of the forehead to prevent any instrument from entering the opening in the head.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And if you see that the abscess drains pus, then quickly make an incision over it, and take advantage of what the midwife does to approach so that the incision is not deeper than the opening in the head.  [And place the vertitge (a type of instrument) that runs along the instrument from above, and let the minister hold the instrument and rotate the vertitge as the opening in the head is exposed.]
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when the ulcer appears and is touched with the hand and feels hot and moist, then you should dry that part of the head with a sponge.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And if you see pus in the ulcer and it does not drain quickly, then make a pointed cautery over it so that the ulcer is opened and it is not deeper than the opening in the head.   [And when the pus has been discharged, then place a poultice that has been soaked in rose oil or oil mixed with some astringent; and place the calca7 (a type of bandage) on the section where the ulcer was.]
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And place a bandage over the head and on top of the poultice, clean wool that has been soaked in water in which mallows have been boiled.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that the patient does not drain pus quickly, then make a pointed cautery over the opening in the head so that it is more opened and not deeper than the opening in the head.    [Then let it be cured after two days with an ointment that is suitable for it to heal.]
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And sometimes the head and poultice are washed with water and honey, and then with water in which verbena or long pepper has been boiled, and then return to the ointment.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the poultice is stuck in the head, then you should be prohibited from treating it with an iron, but instead treat it as we have said in the previous division.
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter 75:
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach midwives how to treat live fetuses according to their appearance when they are born in a non-natural way.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	It is necessary that the midwife knows the appearance of a natural childbirth by its characteristics, and when you see the woman expressing the lower parts and desiring to smell the air, and being pressed upon by what is above her, and hastening the birth of the fetus, then you will know that this delivery is according to natural figure, and it is the birth of it on top of her head, and the second one with it hanging or suspended from the umbilical cord.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	So when you see these signs, then let the belly be compressed so that the fetus descends gently as it descends over his head, and the second one to him, and is washed of those superfluities with good washing.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu .i., o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	But that which is other than this part is unnatural and unworthy, for when the fetus is born on his feet and his body is born before his head and his arms, or when it is born on its side with one arm, or under its feet. Or it is born on its body and its head is born with what is suitable so that the fetus is born on his back and his feet are hanging, or his head is born and his arm, or from his belly and he is turned onto his neck, and resembling those figures of him that are unworthy.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	And it is necessary that the midwife be wise and subtle in all those causes, and that she guards against error and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	I am showing you all the figures of those, and what skills they have in order to be understood by this and to stand for this.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the child is born on its head through a natural delivery, and it is violent with the mother and there is difficulty in delivering it, and when the strength of the mother has already been weakened, then make her deliver the child, or if women have it, evaporate its amniotic fluid with fennel and olive oil.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	Then the midwife should insert her little finger between its lips and split it with her fingernail, or suck that moisture out of it with her mouth.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press the woman's belly to make the fetus come down.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	But if it does not come out, then cover the woman with a poultice of linseed and a poultice of fennel with honey.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	Then command the midwife to press it and make the woman sneeze with a seasoning; and put the poultice in her mouth and nose for an hour, because the fetus will come out immediately.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if both ends of the fetus have not yet come out at first, then cover them with a little ease little by little.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	But if it does not obey the instrument, then put the woman on a bed and lift her feet up, and then rock the bed on the ground; and the woman should be held so that she does not fall because of the rocking.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the hands are not turned inside out and the fetus is dead, then cut them open and pull out the fetus's arm or tie its body to your hand with a cloth and pull it out equally, because that will come out.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	About the delivery of the embryo on its feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the fetus is on its feet, then you should push those up, and then turn the fetus a little, and then suck it, and then take one of its feet and stretch those little by little.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	But when it has come in between the thighs, then you command it to be squeezed out, and make her sneeze with seasoning, because it will come out if God wills.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it has not come out with what we have mentioned, then you return the fetus little by little to its natural second position, because that will come out with an easier delivery.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is prohibited by everything that we have mentioned, then take a poultice of alder and dissolved gum, and beat them both well in the mortar, and then line with that the amniotic fluid of the woman, at the bottom of her belly.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And then make her sneeze in lukewarm water until she gets rid of the phlegm.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when his limbs are softened, then make him smoke with myrtle and put that under him.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when she has smoked for an hour, then make her sneeze on a bed, and then suck her mouth and lift from that, and press the bottom part of her belly with a little compression, because the fetus will be delivered immediately.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Delivery of the fetus on its hands and feet.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the fetus is delivered in this form, then you should push its hands little by little; and the woman should be bent over a bed, her feet held down, and the arms should be stretched out on the bed, and the hands completed.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And then press her belly little by little, and pull out what is below its feet from the armpits until it is prepared in the bottom part.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the fetus is not delivered, then take its feet and move them violently, and then press what is above the armpits little by little until the fetus can reach the parts above.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And then put its hands in and suck the fetus little by little, and command the woman to be squeezed until the fetus is delivered.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Delivery of the fetus hanging sideways by one of his hands.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	It should be understood as a reduction of the hand; but if you cannot reduce it, then raise the woman and make her walk around.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if she cannot walk, then make her lie on the bed, and rock her thighs with violent rocking, and then give her something to drink which you have prepared from poultices.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And when the delivery is complete, then make her sneeze on a bed, and then study the reduction of the hand, and suck the fetus into a natural position, and make the woman sneeze and command him to press himself until he is delivered.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Delivery of the fetus on its neck with its hands and face expanded and his forehead pressed against his mother's abdomen.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	The midwife should hold the fetus' hand and then roll it little by little, and this will be easier for her.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when he is born, and after he has been cleaned off, then put on him what we have mentioned of oil and poultices.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And then command him to hold his mother little by little, and when you have done that, then make her sneeze on a bed and command him to be pressed; and make her sneeze with seasoning.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	Preparation of the fetus delivered sideways.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When they are about to be born from the mother in this way, consider and then you should insert the second one with your fingernail until it is evacuated of moisture.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the fetus is suspended over his face and neck, then you should insert it into the armpit, so that it is not held back and delayed.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	And then press the fetus into the arm pits so that it rests there according to what you have commanded, and command the woman to squeeze herself several times, and he will be delivered with an easier delivery, if God wills.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	Delivery of twins or multiple fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Know that twins are born several times, and some also give birth to three or four, but that is strange and rare; but their causes are natural, and they do not live.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And count them, although they may be multiple, one second one, and they are separated by caesarean section, distinguish those within the membrane in each of their umbilical cords; and some are delivered naturally with an easy delivery, and some are delivered with a non-natural delivery as we have mentioned.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if they are difficult to deliver and come to what we have said about the non-natural figures, then you should cure them as we have recounted.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the midwife is skillful and does this with ease and skill, and with delay, and she is prepared in every way as it was for her from the beginning, bringing health.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Remembrance of that which forms in the womb out of embryos and abortions.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Sometimes they are formed in the mother's womb one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and even ten, and I have indeed verified that a woman had an abortion of six, and another of ten, all formed, which cause was made by the measurement of the glorious sages.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all that should be in the science of the midwife who is strong with her to go to that which resembles that, and then pause at that.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter 76.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	On the Extraction of a Dead Fet
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you are treating a dead fetus and have followed our advice on the division of medicine and it has not been expelled, and you must use surgery with your hand, then consider whether the woman is in good health and does not suffer from any of the conditions that may cause harm to her. If she is healthy and free of these conditions, proceed with the following:
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Have the woman lie on her back, with her head tilted down and her thighs elevated.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	The assistant should be on either side of the woman or tied to the bed so that the woman's body does not extend beyond the extraction of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	Then, moisten the mother's mouth with warm oils and a poultice made from aloe, fennel seed, and linseed.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	Then, the midwife should grease her hand with these oils and poultices, and gently insert her hand into the mother, and then circle her hand around the place where the nails of the fetus are.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	And when it is in the right position: then consider whether the fetus is ready to descend head first, and then place its nails in its heels, or in its neck, or in its mouth, or on its palate, or under its beard, or in the hollow of its collarbone, or in the close proximity of its ribs, or below its armpits.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	But if the descent is over its feet, then in the groin or in the middle of its back.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And make sure to have the nail in your right hand, and place the curve of the fetus in that space between the fingers of your left hand, and insert your hand gently, and place the nail in one of those places we mentioned, until it reaches the desired effect.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And then place and fix another nail in its position, or the third if necessary, so that it is attracted equally, and not extended according to its straightness only.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And let it be pulled apart entirely, so that the extraction of it is eased as it is done in teeth extractions.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And make sure that the extension is softened between them; and if any part of it is retained, then have the midwife grease her fingers with oil and insert those fingers and rotate with those parts that are retained.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Then, if the part of the fetus is out-of-place, then have the nails be moved to a place that is higher; and do this until the whole fetus is delivered.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	But if the hand is out in front of the other one, and it is not possible to return it by the contraction of the fetus, then have a cloth be wrapped around it; and then extract that part until it is all delivered, and insert that or in the joint of the hand or in the armpit.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And do this with the other hand and the two feet as well.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	But if the head of the fetus is large, or there is contraction during its exit, or there is swelling on its head, then have the midwife insert between her fingers a thorny spatula and split open the head and extract the fluid, or uncover it with an instrument called "alundat", the shape of which will come with the shapes of other instruments in the chapter that comes next.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And do likewise if the fetus has a large head by nature: and then insert it with a sponge or take it up with an awl as we have said before; and then extract its bones with forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head has exited and is constricted by its collarbone, then have the moisture that is in its armpits be poured out.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	But if it is not complicated, nor obstructed by its exit, then insert the head immediately as soon as possible for you.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the lower abdomen is swollen or there is water inside it, then pierce that area so that the moisture inside it runs out.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	But if the fetus is above its feet, then the attraction of it is weaker and the direction of it to the mother's mouth is weaker.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	But if it is constricted by the abdomen and armpits, then extract that with a cloth which you will have wrapped around your hand, and split open the abdomen and armpit so that what is inside them runs out.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	But if the other limbs are coming out and the head is turned, then have the midwife insert her left hand; but if the mother's mouth is open, then insert your hand into its throat, and circle with that hand the head, and pull it towards the mother' mouth, and then insert in it a nail or two nails, and pull it with those.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mother's mouth is constricted by an ulcer that is happening to it, then do not press on it; instead, administer an infusion of moist and fatty causes.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And use poultices; and follow the patient with waters that soften and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the fetus is on its side, then if possible, have it turned; and administer what we said about the living fetus.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if that is not possible, then let it be inserted in the armpits, and then extracted.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And make sure to not leave any cause inside the second one.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed all of your operation, then administer what we said about the cure in ulcers that are happening to the mother.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if blood flow occurs, then stop it with styptic waters and administer the other cure.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And I have also seen a woman whose fetus was dead inside her, and then on that fire another pregnant woman, and then the dead fire is the other fetus.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	An ulcer happened to her in the umbilical area; and it was inflated until an open fire appeared, and then the arms started to move.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And I was called to cure him, and I medicated him for a long time, but the wound did not heal.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then I applied on him some poultices with strong attraction, and extracted from him one bone, and then after a few days, I extracted another bone; and I was very astonished, for there was no bone inside his belly.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then I thought they were the bones of the dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Then I continued to heal the wound, and extracted from him many bones, the woman having had them in her joints for a long time, and already seeing in such a way for a long time, corrected with her a little movement of the arm.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And I did not attribute that to be strange, but in what there is science and aid to what the doctor does with his hand for curing.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Of the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Form of the opening of the mother's mouth.
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of constriction in which the limbs are wrapped, to this constriction there are two virtues on both ends of two bones.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	But this virtue is that it be made more subtle by constriction, and it be done with ebony or wood of trees.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And let the thickness of each trunk be the width of two fingers and the margin of each one is an inch and a half, and the length of each is a palm and a half; and in the middle place of two trunks there are two joints of that measure trees which are already closed, of which the length is a palm and a few less.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two additions should be inserted into the mouth of the mother so that she is opened by them when you turn the two prescribed vertigoes.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Here is another form, even more subtle and finer:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	It should be made of boxwood or beech in the likeness of forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	But at the end of it there should be two additions just like forceps, and the length of those additions should be one palm, and their width should be two digits.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open the mother with those, then you should make the woman lean back so that her feet are hanging, opening what is between her thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	Then open your hand with the instrument just as you do with forceps equally according to how much you want of the mouth of the mother while the midwife does what she wants.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of vertigo that the ancients said:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	Form of impellor by which the fetus is pushed:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	Form of amsidity by which the great head is contained
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is assemled to forceps whose teeth in the end, just like forceps, and sometimes it is made long just like forceps whose teeth are like dog's teeth with which it is cut into and contained.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Form of few amsidity:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Form of a hook having one spine:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Form of a hook having two spines:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Form of forceps whose teeth close by which the head of the fetus is contained:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	Form of spatula having two ends by which the head is cut off:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Form of two wide spatulas:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All those instruments are exercised, and when they are more multiplied and prepared, the artesian should be closer to his operation and closer to men because of their quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And it is not a sin for you to make those instruments, for the necessity of them cannot be excused.
De extraccio de la segondina.	On extraction of the afterbirth:
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the afterbirth is retained after childbirth, then you should command the woman to retain her breath, and then make her sneeze with snuff, and press your hand over her mouth and nose, and if through that it comes out, good.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if not, then you take a pitcher and pierce in the lid a hole and place in that herbs burning the mouth of the mother with rosemary and rue and dill and chamomile and Arab scammony and cinnamon and frankincense.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All those herbs or some of them should be submerged in water in the pitcher, and place that over the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	Then place a reed cannula into the mouth of the mother, and hold that in while the vapor comes into the cavity of the mother.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And then make her sneeze as we have said, and the afterbirth will be pushed out with speed.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	But if this cure does not work and it is still inside, then command the midwife to immerse her left hand in olive oil or in myrrh gel and then place that in the vagina and squeeze with that the afterbirth, and when the afterbirth has been found, take hold of it little by little according to rectum position so that the mother does not suffer a violent push.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Before, ensure that it is moved to the right and left sides with ease.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And then adjust the amount of attraction, for she will obey and be pushed out of adhesion.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mother's mouth is constricted, we have already recommended the cure with snuffing and with medicine of the pitcher with herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	But if it is not pushed out with all the causes that we have recommended, then be careful not to tire yourself out by doing that in repetition of abstraction, but rather ensure that what comes out of her mouth lies in the woman's lap, and then anoint that with ointment and tetrafarmacon; for that will make it hard soon enough and will be dissolved and pushed out.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	But when she is raised up, there is evil odor to the head and the stomach, and that makes the woman sick; then ensure that she is administered below with smoking and convenient to that.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	But some of the Ancients have already been treated with smoking of nasea and dry figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	Form of instrument by which the woman is smoked for retention of menses and afterbirth:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It should be made of glass or of horn.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And the small end should be placed into the vagina and the wide end over the fire, and the smoking should be placed over the embers of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And hold that in while the smoking is consumed and repeat another.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	On cure of anus of un-perforated child:
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	Young children and their anuses are not perforated, they only appear subtle and swollen.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then command the midwife to perforate with her finger that swelling; and if not, perforate it with a pointed spatula, and be careful not to touch the membrane.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	Then place over that wool soaked in wine and oil; and then cure that with ointment while it is swollen.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	But if you fear that it is swollen, then place in the slit a cannula for several days, and hold it when the child wants to defecate.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And then occurs swelling of the anus by hardening of clot or of abscess; then ensure that hardening is cut into, and then it is cured with what we have said of the cure and the lead.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	On cure of fistulas which descend from below:
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistulas which descend in the beginning of below pus is low and thick, those which descend near the anus exit or in the space of one part.
E es una fistula o motas.	And it is a fistula or more.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And when that swelling is old and hard, and some times it is penetrated by these fistulas to the point of penetration.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those are pushed out by what is exited from those through exit and by farting; and sometimes the woman suffers pain with that exit, and much fluid exits from them with a fart.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And sometimes from those fistulas some penetrate into the bladder, and into the throat of the vagina; and they penetrate into the junction of the crotch and into the notch of the anus.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And when the fistula is penetrated into the anus and does not penetrate, then you put your finger in the anus, and insert a thin probe of horn or iron into the fistula when it is swollen.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	But if in that there is swelling, then insert into it a probe of lead or of horsehair into the fistula while you feel the probe or the hair in your finger.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel that at all or no process of exit nor farting nor swelling, as we have said, then be sure that it is not penetrated, and then try the cure.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula is penetrated into the bladder or into the throat of the vagina, then its sign is emission of urine from that and prohibition of it going to that as the location is cured with medicine has been hardened.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	But if it penetrates into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and causes pain in the area around it, then the sign is that you should test it by trying to move it here if there is no tortuosity in the bone, and causing pain in the area around the affected part; and that you should apply a poultice to it from time to time; and that it does not respond to that medicine, nor is it consolidated with an ointment.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those penetrating fistulas, there is no cure for all of them; and their cure is toil and vanity of the foolish doctors who are committed to them.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	But in those that do not penetrate and are not ancient, healing with iron is expected according to what I have told you, and that which I have already tried.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And it is that the patient holds his hands over his head and lifts up his legs in between them, his thighs are inclined towards his belly, and then you try to insert a probe of lead or of ram's horn if there is tortuosity in the fistula, trying to find the spot where the probe goes in.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if that feeling is around his neck, then you should insert your finger there into the neck.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel the probe already inserted into it, pushing itself in discovered, then you should know for certain that it is penetrating; and then do not work on it, for there is no healing in that, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	But nevertheless some say that it is healed in some men with vinegar.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And the medicine by which healing is expected in him is that you apply a fine cautery according to the size of the fistula, as it has been mentioned, and you insert that ignited one into the fistula until it comes around the neck; and then repeat that two or three times until you know that all those fistulated meats that are like a feather cane are completely burned.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And then heal that with poultices wrapped in cloth until you have burned all those meats that are joined together, and then heal that with medicines that generate and consolidate the flesh, and if it is healed, well; and if not, then it will not be healed at any time by another cure.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if it enters and does not penetrate into your finger which is in the anus, and between that and the probe there is a slight space of flesh or of membrane, then you cut the skin at the beginning of the fistula, and you dry up the skin, and you see that it dries up by means of the probe, and let it be in the fistula until the incision reaches the place where the end of the probe comes out, and through the probe it is released and cut.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And then cleanse those fistulated meats which are like a quill of feather and from which no cause is seen to come out.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	But if blood flows out between you and your operation when you insert those meats, then the millstone which is and the pus which comes out is cauterized with fire or with a sharp medicine; for cautery with fire dries up the two habits: it is the hardening of those joined meats, and the cessation of the blood from the exudation of moistness.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And then heal that with poultices wrapped in cloth or with cotton until the wound feels dry, and then heal the ulcer with ointments which generate and consolidate hard flesh.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And those are medicines in which there is constriction and drying up; when then it is restored, it is already healed and you do not fear iteration.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	But if the fistula already pierces into the anus and is elongated from it to the surface of the body, then you insert your finger into the anus and probe with it.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And therefore if you feel the probe and between you and it there is a slight space of membrane or of flesh, and it is close to penetration, then it is not an operation on him but according to way of trust and of hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	That cause is administered in him one of three ways: either cauterize that as we have said; or dry it up until you can achieve the cavity of him so that you may insert the catheters and the cure is applied; and do not proceed with cutting so that you do not pierce the membrane containing the neck, and that you bring about on the patient the rising of the exudation against his will; and then heal that with what we have said for it heals quickly; or elongate that membrane and cleanse that pus which dries up near the anus as we have said, or with a probe or another instrument of acute extremity, and then cleanse those fistulated meats which are in the incision where you can pierce by means of crusting; and then strive to bring about the restoration of all the ulcer with cutting, and if the orifice of pus above is not consolidated, and the fistula remains open at the anus, and pus flows out more quickly through the patient.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes the fistula is finished in this way: it is when you insert the probe into the fistula, and it is on the side of the anus around the surface of the body with the skin and at the edge of the anus, then take a probe of perforated extremity which is prepared like a needle to pierce hearts according to this form.
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	And insert into that the thread wrapped in wool or around those; and then insert the probe with the thread into the fistula until you achieve the cavity of him.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	But if it pierces near the edge of the anus inside, then you pull out that thread from that piercing as you insert your finger into the anus; and pull out the end of the thread and bring the two ends together, and tighten each one, and let it remain like that for a day or two, and when you have pierced the meat with the thread, loosen that so that those meats which are between the two ends of the thread are pulled.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And then heal the ulcer until it is consolidated and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	But if the orifice of the fistula is not penetrating, then make it penetrate in whatever way it is prepared for you, unless it pierces into the anus, for it is not for you to do that which would pierce the membrane; and then heal with that which it has healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The form of the split spatula with which the fistula is split: its curvature is made acute and the other side not acute, so that you do not pierce that which is not necessary, as it happens.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	Of suturing of hemorrhoids in which blood flows in the incision of those.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hemorrhoids are according to two ways, for either they are between the anus resembling charcoal, or they are as if they were with grease of fat.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And they are small and large, and the blood flows from them at all times, and they are moved, and they are outside the anus and on its edges.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	But those which are outside the anus are according to the months of a little humidity, from which flows green water or a drop of blood with a continuous body, and they are according to the color of the body.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the cure for that which is inside the anus is to command the patient to strain and to press in so that the anus dries up and the hemorrhoids appear to you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you grab it and suspend it with your nails or whatever you have those by your fingernail, and then pierce them down to their roots.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	But if the nails are not held in them by their moisture and softening of them, then take those with an ashen cloth or a twig or a piece of wool, and pull them out with your teeth, and then insert them and pound upon them some powdered herbs over them after the incision, so that they are like cauterization; or cauterize them according to what is preceded in the chapter on cauterizing.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And then treat these with the other cure until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the anus does not obey defecation, then the patient should be anointed with ointment in which there is a little bit of biting substance, and he should be washed with the water that is in the basin, and it should cause the anus to open easily when the patient is squeezed.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	But if the hemorrhoids protrude from the anus, then their cause is lighter, and it suffices that you grab them with your finger or that you grab them with a piece of cloth, insert them, and then treat them with what we have already said until they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And if you have cut them, then you should administer a suture in this way: take the wax wrapped around and insert it into the needle, and then extract the hemorrhoids at their upper parts, and let the needle pierce the root of the other part; wrap both ends of the wax around the part below the needle and crosswise; tighten the hemorrhoid firmly, and then squeeze the wax and take out the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And do this to all of them, leaving one untouched, in order that the superfluous blood flows from it.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	Then place a cloth steeped in rose oil or cerate over the anus, and order the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And let that remain until it becomes dry; then treat the hemorrhoids with ointment or with another cure until they are healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	Concerning the cure of fistulas:
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Many times they happen due to dryness of a fissure or due to constriction by nature.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And if they are old and the medicine does not help, then you should scrape them with a spathon or with your fingernail until they become moist and you see blood oozing from underneath, which prohibits their consolidation; then treat them until they are consolidated.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Then you should dry them more vehemently than before, until there is no blood and they are excoriated; then treat them until they are healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	Concerning the cure of piles, it is a key point:
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	Know that hemorrhoids, which are also called piles, are a key point; they are not unless round knots according to the color of the body resembling the head of a nail, and they are found all over the body but especially in the lower parts below the feet and the fingers, and because of them you should experience pain.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	Then the cause of what is in the circle of the nail should be pricked and held with tweezers or with a piece of cloth, and be pulled out from its root; then treat it.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you want, cauterize the second one that is mentioned in the previous chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	But warts are small rough round fistulas on the surface of the body, and they often appear on children's hands.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And its cure is that you stretch it and insert something into it, or that you dry it with wax or tar until it becomes dry.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you want, cauterize it as we have said before, with fire or with sharp medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And they are eradicated either face up or face down depending on the instrument that you use.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	But a mole is a small fuzzy or hairy lump on the surface of the body found especially on the back, and when it is rubbed, it feels like an ant bite; it is made all over the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	And its cure is that you take a reed pen or a feather pen, make it very pointed, and place it on the mole so that it contains the circle of the reed pen; then you rotate your hand with the pen so that you insert what is inside the circle of the mole, place it on the back of the flesh, and eradicate the mole from its root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, do this with an iron or steel reed pen as follows:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	Let the end of the reed be very thin and blunt (so that it is not perforated) and wrapped so that over the finger it looks washed and rotated.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you want, cauterize the mole as it is mentioned before in the chapter of cautery.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	Concerning the forms of the instruments that are used to give cautery:
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Sometimes cautery is done with silver or brass or melted and hammered iron; and sometimes it is done with small or large instruments depending on what they are used for, because the cautery of small children should be small; and of those whose anuses are tight or painful, their cauteries should be small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of large cautery is:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The end of the reed where the pouch is tied should be wide as follows; and it should have a distinction where the pouch is tied like this many times.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the lower end which is inserted into the anus should be blunt  (so it is not open) like a lion's tooth, getting thinner; and on one side of the reed there should be two holes, and on the other side there should be one hole, and the size of the hole should be according to the thickness of the thread and bigger for the thicker ones.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And let the pouch in which the medicines of animal bladder or sheepskin are placed, and let its root be one palm.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And it should be perforated with many holes as it is rotated; and if the space between the holes is the thickness of the finger.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	Then insert into those holes strong tar that is made of ten tar, or wind it with that; and fasten the pouch with that; and when the pouch is placed on it, squeeze the end of the cautery between two distinctions with a strong constriction, and then cauterize with that each hole: But the quality of cauterizing with that is that you fill the pouch with medicine, which should be warmed according to the amount of tolerance of the patient; and take care that it is not too hot nor too cold.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	Then the patient should lie on his back, and raise his legs up and place underneath him a board or a plank; then smear the end of the cautery with oil or egg white or mucilage of fenugreek or something similar; and then insert it into the anus easily, and then the minister takes the pouch and squeezes it with two fingers and expels from the cautery all that is inside it with strength until everything in the cautery is evacuated; then take out the cautery and let the patient raise his legs against the wall.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine forces him to defecate, he should hold it as much as he can; and if he sleeps with it for a whole night, it is better to wake up.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	But if you cauterize him in the diseases of looseness of the belly and he defecates a lot, then you should repeat the cautery until it is healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if in the anus there are hemorrhoids or hard lumps, then let the cautery be very thin and sharp, of the cauteries with which children are cauterized.
De curacio de las plaguas.	Concerning the cure of wounds:
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	I have already said in the division of the cure of wounds what suited the free part, and I have also mentioned the cure of them with the hand and medicines according to the complement.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore I say that wounds are diversified according to what caused them and according to the place where they happened.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes for which wounds are made are sometimes due to a stone, or insertion of a spear or knife, or a punch with a lance, or a stick, or an arrow, or something similar from many causes.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	But the pain that is in parts of the body are like the plague which afflicts the head, neck, feet, belly, or armpits, and resembles those of the limbs.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And I have described the cure for some plagues so that you understand that argument and rule about other plagues.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	I will begin with simple plagues of the head, for the memory of compounded ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Therefore, I say that when a simple plague occurs in the head and it is not a fracture, then consider: if it is due to a stone or something similar that has broken the skin and there is a large wound that you fear might develop into an abscess, then you should immediately perform a craniotomy and phlebotomy, according to the amount of vertigo the patient experiences if no other reason prohibits phlebotomy, especially if the blood that flows from the wound is minimal.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And perform phlebotomy on the opposite side of the affected area; and let the patient abstain from food and drink, as well as heavy meals.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	But if some cause prohibits phlebotomy, then let the patient reduce their intake of food and avoid wine and meat.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And apply to the wound, if an abscess has formed, a poultice soaked in rose oil or wine in which styptic herbs have been infused.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	But if there is no sign of an abscess, then apply to the wound, if it is fresh and the air has not changed that powder which I will mention shortly below.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has changed its nature, then apply some ointment until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	But if the wound is large or caused by a cut or something similar, and its lips are not closed together by pus, then close them with stitches as I will describe in the section on stitching.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	But if the wound is exposed to the bone and there is no retention of pus except for a small suspension, then insert into it and properly treat the wound with medicines and restore the flesh by applying a poultice on the broken skin, and order the patient to abstain from food that is coarse: onions, garlic, and their likes, until it is healed.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you find putrefaction in the wound and it does not adhere to the bone, then cut away all that is rotten and throw it out, then properly treat the wound.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	But if in these plagues there is an artery or vein from which blood can flow and it is not cut off by medicines, then probe the artery, and if you find it uncut, then insert a sponge or ligature into it; and if necessity compels you to do otherwise than what we have said, then cauterize it until the blood is stanched.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these plagues are simple and small, then their cause is usually slight; therefore, you should apply to them this powder which hardens before the air changes it.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	And the manner of making the powder is this: take one part olive oil, two parts dragon's blood, and three parts powdered alumen; let all be well ground and sifted, then fill the wound with it and bind it tightly so that it dries over the wound, then coagulate the blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And properly bind it above with powder and lint, and do not loosen it as long as the wound is not abscessed, for if you do, the medicine will not take effect.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And sometimes one can make it alone without dragon's blood when you do not have any at hand.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And this method of treatment is done for large wounds when one deems it proper to apply it and the air has not altered them.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has altered them, especially in summer time, then do not use this powder, but instead treat them as we have said, by applying some soothing ointments, or by making a poultice of wheat flour with water and honey so that it becomes a paste; then properly treat the wounds with the other treatment until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	But if a bone fracture occurs with the wound and it is small, then remove it with tweezers.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And I will describe the cure for fractures of the head in what follows.
De las plaguas del col.	Of wounds on the neck:
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	But if a wound occurs on the neck, then it does not differ in treatment from a simple wound on the head.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	But if the neck's nerve or artery is cut, then if it is a nerve, it should not be treated with anything that causes violent contraction, as well as aconite and arnica which are like vitriol and its likes because they harm nerves and cause constriction.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not apply to the wound anything that causes any heat, for the substance of nerves is sensitive to heat and their continuity is through the brain, which is the source of all members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if it is treated with mild medicines, as well as being washed with tepid water, any poultice infused in rose oil or other oils, and oozing when washed with tepid water and the other stones according to this manner, and moist bandages.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	But if the wound is large, then administer stitches, or tie together its lips, and properly treat it with powder until it is healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	But if the wound is deep or there is pus in it, then pierce it in its most depressed part.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	But if the wound has cut an artery and blood flows from it, then stop or dry it, or ligature it, or cauterize it if necessity compels you to do so.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the windpipe or all of it is cut and the neck' veins are saved, then close the lips of the wound with stitches over the windpipe and do not touch it; release that and return it to its natural shape, and properly bind it with a decent bandage, and let it be bound by a tight bandage for several days; then treat it with ointments in which there is contraction and excitement until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	But if the wound has made an impression in the bone, then pierce it, and if there are fragments of bone in it, extract them all that you can; and what you cannot extract, let it be so that the wound suppurates, and the separation of it is relieved.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the wound is recent, then apply powder to it which I have described.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	But if a fistula has formed in the wound, then treat it with what its memory will bring to you later in this chapter.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Of wounds on the neck or of their likes when they are made by spear, or by knife, or by lance, or by something similar:
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a wound from a spear or knife, and you see its depth, then consider, for if the patient is pale, know that the wound is deadly.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if there is no depth to it and the wound is recent with its blood, then apply to it in the first hour powder, and do not bind it tightly so that the blood is not retained in its depth and returning to the heart and the patient does not faint, but apply an attractive ointment to it, and loose it twice a day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the ointment is not at hand, then you should stop the orifice of the plague with a piece of wool so that it sucks out what comes from the humidity; and make the patient sleep on his side so that what is inside him can flow out.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	But if three or more days have passed since the plague and the patient has not experienced spasms, nor a bad heart tremor, nor a stricture of the throat, and you see his other dispositions are good, then know that he is saved from the plague; then heal him with leeches and other remedies until he is healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	But if his healing is delayed and the wound remains open for a long time, then know that a fistula has formed; therefore, heal it according to its nature.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the plague is a cut from a spear or dagger and is superficial on the foot or leg, then heal it with what is preceded by sewing, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	But if there has already been damage to the bone and pieces of it are sticking out, then you should twist the wound and cut to extract those pieces, if they are separated.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	But if they are not separated, then let them remain inside until the wound is healed, for their extraction is painful.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And for other plagues that occur in other limbs, the cure is the same as what we have already said.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of plagues of the belly:
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The disorder that occurs in the belly is either great, or small, or medium-sized.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	Of the great ones, some times see the intestine or nerve of the intestine, so there is an intrusion of them and their sewing must be more forceful and more subtle.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And a small disruption is made difficult in another way, and you see that their reduction is more difficult if you do not stop the intrusion of them into their place immediately, for it opens and swells so that its interior is made difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And therefore the best disruption is medium-sized, for in that one the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, just as it is difficult in the two species mentioned before.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And know that there are four ways of sewing the belly, but two sutures are common to all other sutures of the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And two other sutures are specific to the others plagues, but nonetheless they are more specific in the sewing of the belly.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	I will return to you each one with exposure and explanation.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Therefore I say that when the plague is small and there has been some cause of the intestine through it, and it is difficult to reduce it, then it is in one of two ways: either by smallness of the disruption as we have said, or when the intestine is received inflammation due to the chill of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And therefore when that is so, you should warm it in such a way that you immerse a sponge or damp cloth in water with only teasel, or you gather in squinant water, and cyperum, and spic, and embrocate with that the intestine until the inflammation is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And sometimes it does this in the thing in which there has been constriction, and it is better than water alone in resolving inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And therefore when you see the inflammation is resolved, then you should moisten the intestine with water in which there is added mallows and alder, for by that the interior of it is eased with little cause.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	But if its interior is not eased by this cure, then split the disruption a little with an instrument by which the hemorrhoids are split.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And the first cure is better when it is not cut, and there is no need to dry it up and starve it.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Of the instrument, know its shape:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One part of it is bent acute, and the other part not acute, and the end be subtle, and its subtlety not be like a spatula, but rather be blunt a little.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And therefore when the plague is enlarged and comes out of the intestine, then you should see that its reduction is according to its natural shape, in its proper place, if possible, for that is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	But when the disruption is wide and it is in the lower part of the belly, then you should have the patient lie on his back, and place his legs above his head; and if it is in the higher part of the belly, then you should place his head and feet below.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And similarly if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the belly, then pay your attention and consideration to that always so that the part in which there is the plague is higher than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And thus you should manage this in great plagues and in medium-sized plagues.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in small plagues, do what is prepared for you, and let the minister be between your fingers, holding the plague all around with his hand and uncovering it to see that there is no sewing any cause whatsoever.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	And this is the common way of sewing: one where you take the needle, or count of needles according to the amount of the amplitude of the plague; and let go of the end of the disruption of the finger, and tighten the needle one, and then you do not put thread in the two ends of the string, with two ends of the thread that is below the fingers, within the fingers, so that you make the needle penetrate from that part; and you have added the two ends of the thread and the two ends of the thread, and so you have made four turns.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And then tighten with double thread around the needle, and sometimes from two parts together, and then bring the two lips and the plague by gathering decently; and let go of the thickness of the finger and take another needle in that, and then tie it with a thread as it was with the first needle; and do not cease doing this if there is a need for needles until all the contraction of the plague is completed.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And let the needles be between thinness and subtlety, for thin needles penetrate quickly into the flesh; and thick ones are of difficult intrusion into the flesh, and therefore let them be thinner in subtlety and thickness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And let the needle not be pushed into two ends of the wound near each other, so that the flesh is not quickly split and the plague opens before its consolidation.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And they are not prolonged in sewing so that the plague is not prohibited from consolidation.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And then insert the ends of the needles so that they do not tickle the patient when he wakes from his sleep; and you shall place over the sutures expanded flours from all sides, which have the ends of the needles; and let go of them when you know that the plague is consolidated.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	And these species of sewing with needles in this manner is more convenient in small plagues, for they have in their sewing one needle or two or around them.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	But the second sewing is common: and it is that you manage with sewing the four ends, of the wound and two ends of the thread, in one go, with a needle in which there is thread wrapped around in both thinness and thickness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And then when you have the needle penetrated these four ends, reduce the needle of that part from which it started, so that the thread drawn back goes through the most superficial part of the plague, so that the sewing is according to sewing with cloth in which the clothes are tight.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And place between each stitch an amount equal to the thickness of the little finger.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	This stitch is known to men.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And with this stitch I healed the wound of a man in his belly who had been stabbed with a knife, and it was an injury of a palm's width, and it had exited the intestines about two palms from the navel and it was a disruption in the middle of the body; and then I healed him after the intestine had been punctured through the wound for twenty-four hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the wound was healed in about fifteen days, and he was cured, and he is doing well now, and his condition has returned to normal.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And the other doctors had judged that he would not be healed; and by a miracle I healed him without ointment, for it was in a place where ointments were not effective or any medicine, but I placed cotton wool on the wound two times a day and washed it frequently with honey water until it was healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	But I will describe two kinds of stitches according to the narration of the Lord.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And you should start with the stitch of the cord, and insert the needle from the outside inwards.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And then the needle penetrates through the cord and the surrounding tissues according to its direction and length throughout the whole body, and leaves the end of the thread in which you inserted the needle; and make the needle penetrate from the inside out on the other end of the body into the other end of the thread.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And when you have made that one penetrate, then you make the other one penetrate in that end of the body from the inside out; and leave the end of the thread on this side, and make the needle penetrate into the other end from the outside in.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And make it penetrate with that penetration with which you make the other one penetrate in the end of the body which is inside, so that everything penetrates.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And then start from this side of the body and sew that with the end which is of the cord on the other side, and pull the needle out of the cord which has been penetrated, and then return it into that cord and sew the end of the thread which is on the other side of the body with that end of the body; and pull that one out of the cord which belongs to him.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And do that once and again, and do that another time within so that you sew everything which is outside according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the sum of this method of sewing is that you sew with a stitch of skin in which the skin is sewn, so that you sew the cord one time from the end of the thread, and then you sew the other end so that it is completed.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	But the second special stitch which I describe is called Gualia, and it is made of silk thread and rewoven through him, so that you sew it according to its shape with which some doctors sew it, in such a way that they unite each part to its corresponding part according to nature; and they apply one end of him to the other end of the body, and that is done according to how I have taught you.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	Take the needle and put it in the end of the body towards you from the outside, and make it penetrate to the inside in that sole, and leave two ends of the thread; and then turn the needle and make it penetrate from the inside out into two ends of the thread.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	And then turn those ones, and make the others penetrate from the inside out into two ends of the body which are on the contrary side.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this method of sewing is better than common stitching, and it is the stitch which I previously described in memory.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the thread of Gualia.
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And some say that the stitch of the belly is straightened with two needles, so you put in these one by one a thread, and start with the penetration of the needle from what is facing you, and make it penetrate into the other side according to the sewing of those who sew bodies together mouth to mouth.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And know that when there is a disruption in the middle of the belly, then its sewing is more difficult than in other places of the belly.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	But the medication of wound is judgment of the other wounds.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	The cause is that when you see the wound fresh with its blood in front of the air which alters it, and reduce the intestine and sew it and adjust it decently, then put on it powder which makes flesh.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the wound, then put on it some ointments which are at your presence so that they make a hard pebble and draw in the threads, and so that the body and the wound are consolidated; and then heal it as the healing of the other wounds so that it is healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	But if you do not have the medicines at your presence, then put it on immediately, because as soon as it starts to boil, change it two times a day, and permute it two times a day, just as I have taught you, until it is healed, for you do not need other medicine in various conditions when the wounds are simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	But if you fear that the wound will spread to the principal members, then take a woolen thread and submerge it in oil of excellent quality, or in rose oil, and put it on the circumference of the places which are between the ankles and below the heels.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if you feel pain or putrefaction in your intestines, especially when it happens several times, then scorch that with black styptic wine, and especially if the putrefaction is caused by the intestine and has made an opening penetrating into its cavity.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And know that which is of the gross intestine is a more difficult cure than that which is in the subtle intestines.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And it is of difficult cure because the intestine which is called "gegunu" does not receive healing of wound which pierces in him from all; and that is because of the great multitude of veins which are in him and because of his magnitude which is in those, and because of the subtlety of his body and because of its proximity to the nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	But if what proceeds from the wound is the thread, and you obtain it fresh, then reduce it according to your instruction with which you reduce the intestines evenly.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	But if it has passed through him and is already black or green, then tie that with a thread over the place which is blackened in him, so that there comes flux of blood, for in the thread there are veins and arteries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And then insert that which is another that, and put two ends of the thread hanging from the end below the wound out of him, so that over you be elevated the attraction of him because of the lowering of the thread and the emission of the pus of the wound.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Memory of the wounds when they happen in the intestine.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When disruption happens in the intestine and it is slight, then it is possible that it is restored in some people, because I saw one who was wounded in his belly with a spear thrust, and the wound was of the right side of the stomach, and the wound was old and made fistula, and he had an emission from him and swelling.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Then I pursued the cure of him when it was not believed in his healing, but I followed subtilizing him until he was healed and the place was consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And after I saw the site already consolidated, I advised the patient that he should take care of himself and avoid any accident or evil in his belly; and not to cause any harm by this evil accident, but rather to remain in his usual dispositions of eating and drinking, and also go into bath and exercise his body.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And some experienced people have said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it should be tied according to this manner: you take some large leaves; then you attach the two lips of the wound and place one of those leaves with an open mouth over the two lips of the wound; so when it bites down on those and tightens its mouth, cut off its head, for it will adhere and not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And then place another ant nearby, and do not cease to do this with ants one after the other according to the quantity of the entire wound.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	And then return that [the intestine] and sew up the wound; and let those leaves remain attached in the intestine until it is healed, and may no harm befall the patient.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the intestine be sewn with a thin thread made from an animal's intestine, since it is more delicate; and you take the end of one of these intestinal threads, make it very bare, and then sew the end of it to the intestine, wrapped around, and insert this thread through needles and sew it up with that, and return that [intestine] to its disruption.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this manner of sewing with ants is not but according to the way of confidence and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	But if the wound is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the thin intestines, then there is not but subtlety, and not a complete healing of it.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	Of the cure of ulcers and fistulas.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	Know that any wound or abscess when it becomes old and antique, and is made into an ulcer, and is not consolidated and suppurates all the time and is not healed, then, in whatever part of the body it may be, universally it is named a fistula, and we call it azukem.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And a fistula according to truth is a knotted, tough, white nodule, without pain, and with a cavity like that of a penis; and because of this it is named by some rizata, i.e. penis.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And in some people it is moist, which suppurates; and very often the moisture is discharged in a few hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And sometimes this moisture is thick, and it is little, and it is gross, and it is subtle.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And I have already mentioned in the division, when I said of wounds, that any ulcer which is not healed, nor is it naked flesh, but one of nine causes: one of which is either through lack of blood in the body; or through wickedness of it; or because between it and the lips there is tough flesh prohibiting generation of flesh; or because it is of moted leg; or because that ulcer within itself is infected, and the matter which is within it is of bad quality; or because the medicine is inconvenient in the healing of it; or when corruption falls upon the region, and it is pestilential; or through property of the region, as happens in Saragossa, in which there is made difficult digestion of illnesses, and healing of apostemas is delayed by nature; or because in it is one bone, or many bones.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	I have already shown all those causes, and their signs, and the healing of them with medicines in the division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And now I will make you know the cure for a fistula which is made through way of operation with the hand.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	Know that fistulas happen in all the members of the body; for some of them fall to the large veins and arteries, or to the nerves, or to the brain, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to one of the ribs, or to one of the vertebrae of the back, or to any of the composed joints by composition as that of the hand and the foot; and some fall to the proximity of the principal member and of its like.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And therefore that of these fistulas which are according to this manner is one of the illnesses of difficult healing, and does not receive cure, and occupation with it is travail and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if there is one of the fistulas whose depth does not reach to these places which I have said, and you expect and believe in the healing of it, and wish to come to knowledge of it, then take a probe of iron or steel, and if the fistula goes straight, then explore it with that.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	But if the fistula is tortuous, then investigate it with a probe of subtle lead, because lead with the lightness of its body is drawn away and bent according to the tortuosity.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula has terrible movements, it is not possible for you to make signs upon it with a probe.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Then, christen the orifice through its orifices, because the moisture by which you christen it goes through other orifices and flows from them.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And then inquire carefully, according to what manner you can know if here there is a bone or nerve, and the cavity of the fistula is distant or nearby, or it is one fistula whose many orifices are over that, all by the sum of your strength, with your inquiry, with which you inquire the patient, and the invention of pain through your compression with the hand upon the site, and similar to the signs and to the causes accidental to the apostema.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have been through all those causes with true state, then go to the cure according to confidence: and it is that you consider if the fistula apparent is nearby or in salty site, distant from joint, or of nerve, or of artery, or of vein, or of one of the sites which I have said.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then dry the fistula according to what has been said of the nature of it, and watch that which is in that filtration and of corrupted flesh, and that which is born in the orifice of the flesh, or of thistle and its like, and heal that within as it should be healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	But if the fistula is of distant depth and it is straight, then see that you pierce it in the preon as much as to you seems possible, and then cleanse that of all its corrupted flesh; and then administer hot water wrapped in sharp medicines, and insert those within into the cavity of the fistula, which you have understood with iron.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And do that with that several times within so that the sharp medicine corrodes all that which is suppurating in the cavity of the fistula of the corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And then restore that with unguents which engender healthy flesh within so that it is healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	But if it is not healed by that, then you cauterize it according to how we have recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	But if the cause of the fistula is bone and it is because of you certified that, then you inquire and dry that according to how we have said, if you do not prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or of principal member as we have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is discovered in you and there is in it some corruption and blackness, then cut that within so that the corruption be removed entirely; and then heal that with that which it becomes flesh within so that it is healed.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it is not healed and suppurates as it did, then know that you have not reached the entire eradication of the corruption; and then uncover it again and explore it carefully and make the reason of it and the cleansing of it with your very strong right hand, and then restore that.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And therefore if he is healthy, then it is good; but if not, then you should know that this corruption is in the distant depth of the body and has not been conquered, and so your only course of action is to leave it as it is.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the bone that is rotten is small, or you are able to pull it out, then pull it out with fine forceps which are suitable for this task.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if they are loose bones, then remove them all with great care, and do not leave any of them behind due to your own negligence.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	But if you have any concerns about the humors and there is no fear or error in their insertion, then cut into those members or flesh here and free the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	But if you are not prepared to remove the bones in this moment, then place over the wound what will cause it to fester, and leave that within so that it is around those bones of flesh and of ligaments, and guard the wound so that it does not heal, and the incision which you have made during your operation remains restricted.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	Have you, if you fear, place over it a piece of cloth soaked in vinegar or a piece of cloth soaked in Egyptian ointment, or one of the green balms, for when these members fester and the bones are separated from them, their attraction is alleviated.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	But if it is a large bone like the bone of the leg or the thigh, or similar to them, and that which is rotten is only its surface, then cut away that corruption with a razor only as far as it can be removed, and close the wound afterwards.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	But if that which is rotten is a large portion and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close this up and cut into that place where the corruption has occurred, and cure that so that it is consolidated.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And you shall account to me for anything that happens to a man in his thigh due to your negligence during your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	A young man about 30 years old had pain in his thigh, and from the soft parts within was matter that went into the thigh, and it was pustular matter with a large pustule, and there was not to him any extrinsic cause.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And so time was prolonged with that because of the error of the doctors until the pustule opened up and matters flowed out, and his cure was stopped only when the leg was fistulous and many orifices opened in him through which pus and humors of the body flowed.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And so he was cured by many doctors for about two years, and no wisdom was found in them but in their art, until I was called upon.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And I saw his leg and the matters that flowed from him out of those orifices, for a great while; and indeed his body was all swollen and his color was yellow.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And so I inserted the probe into one of those orifices and reached the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And then I probed and examined all the orifices and found that they all led to different parts of the leg.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And so I cut and inserted into one of those orifices where I discovered an opening in the bone, and found it rotten, and it was already black and corrupt, and a portion of the leg was already corrupted where it had penetrated into the membrane.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then I applied that which to me was revealed and prepared for the uncovered bone.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And I found that it was not in the bone but only that corruption which I removed and applied, and I had already broken it up.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And then the wound's restoration was applied with medicine for a long time, and it did not heal.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And then I examined and discovered the bone again for the second time on the first discovery, and found continuous corruption in the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And I applied that which appeared to me from that corruption, and then I caused the cure of it and restoration, and it was not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then I discovered him another time and did not cease to insert the bone little by little particularly and probed its restoration, and it was not restored until I had cut around an inch of it, and that was extracted with its marrow, and then I restored it with medicines, and it is lightly consolidated and healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And it is not necessary to operate on him again or cut him again except for the disposition of his pulse and for the lack of his tolerance and fear of death, for he was overcome in all hours by excess of evacuation syncope ill.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And so he is healed entirely, and nothing remains in the place of the hard bone; and his disposition in his body is made good and his strength has returned to him; and his dispositions are converted and no harm comes to him in walking nor damage in any cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	But if the bone is prominent in the place of the body and has been removed, then you should proceed with that second to this manner: and you should take ligament and strengthen that at the end of that prominent bone, and command someone to extend it in their hand; and pause that woolen ligament most gross from the first ligament; and then ligate that over the flesh which is beneath the bone, and extend the extremity of it so that you attract the flesh to the parts below, and you discover the flesh over the place which you wish to cut so that the saw does not cut the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And pause fust or table beneath the bone properly, for when you do that the saw is not prohibited from cutting the corrupt flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And that the sawing be on the rotten place little by little, for if it is in the concavity of the bone's corruption and does not appear to its feeling, and force it to saw another time.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is rotten and not prominent, before that is one party continued with the other, and the corruption is in the middle place or in a part of it, then you discover the flesh all around; and then pause fust beneath it, and then saw that from the first party where the corruption is so that the sawing is continued on the other party.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And let the sawing be according to the place of the corruption a little, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is in the joint, examine that rotten joint and saw the bone where it is continued from the other part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then there is not reason in him except error.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the breast of the hand or foot, it is very difficult; however, you should inquire into the corruption in whatever manner it appears to you, and cut that open, and close it according to each disposition which is possible for you, and with each error be straightened to you when no vein or nerve causes you harm.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And you should know which are the saws and the razors to cut these bones are much according to the situation of the bones, and their preparation, and their thicknesses and subtleties and great sizes and small, and their hardnesses and rarities; so that you prepare for every kind of operation a convenient instrument for that operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And you should know that operation implies for you on the kind of instrument from which you lack experience and long and great knowledge of the ways of this art, and testimony of ways of illnesses, for when you have them by your masters that which is convenient for the instruments to every illness.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	Here is the translation of the first sentence:
Forma de serra:	The shape of a saw:
Forma de autra serra:	The shape of another saw:
Forma de autra serra:	The shape of another saw:
Forma de autra serra gran:	The shape of another large saw:
Forma de ray:	The shape of a razor:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	Let the head of this razor be according to the shape of a star-shaped key, and its points according to the shape of the points of the staphylea.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And it is not convenient unless the heads of the joints are rubbed when they are corrupted, or the large mouth is widely open.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	The shape of a larger razor than the others:
Forma de razori menor:	The shape of a smaller razor:
Forma de razori lat:	The shape of a wide razor:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	The shape of another saw made decently: let it be made of iron, and the sharpness of it of steel, and the handle of it of a wooden dagger decently made.
Forma de lu:	Its shape:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	The shape of a razor in which there is a cavity:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	The shape of another subtle razor:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	The shape of another razor with a curved extremity:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	The shape of a small razor resembling a tent:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	The shape of a chisel with which bones are cut:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	The shape of another smaller chisel:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	The shape of another chisel; this one resembling a razor, and its extremity is like a saw, and it is used in many places on the bones:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	The shape of a saw which is convenient for cutting into bones:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And its extremity is triangular and acute.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	And it is made of Indian iron, and similarly to all the causes that we have said about razors and chisels and saws.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	Of cutting extremities and of the serration of bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The extremities can be affected either by an intrinsic or extrinsic cause, or as you will have medicated that corruption by treatment with those medicines and the treatment does not help, or if you see the corruption going deeper into the member in which case there is no cause known, then know that when you cut into that member in order for the patient to escape death or a worse evil that is a greater defect of the member.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the sign of that to which it happens, is that the member becomes black in order that it may be cured as if by fire, or it becomes blackened close to where that putrefaction occurred within that member that affects the whole body; and therefore cauterize it with a chisel.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And similarly if the cause of the corruption is a blow from some poisonous causes such as from sea scorpion or viper or rattlesnake, or others.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or the blow is in the extremity of the finger, then cut off the finger and do not give space to the corruption so that it may go into the hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And similarly if it affects the hand, then cut off that part from the joint of the bone, and do not give space to the corruption so that it may go into the forearm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if instead, then cut off the arm at the bend in the joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if the corruption goes further and turns around the elbow, then there is death to the patient; and to add another cause in treatment is a quantity of virtue.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And similarly cut off the toe when there is corruption instead of the finger on the foot, then cut it off at one of the joints.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if it affects the sole of the foot, then cut off the whole foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	But if it enters into the jaw, then cut off the leg at the joint of the jaw.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if the corruption has already come upon the jaw, then there is no remedy except dismissal, and to leave the patient to die.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	And the way of cutting off a member or of cauterizing it is that you tighten the ligament at the part below which you want to cut, and tighten another ligament over the spot; and stretch one ligament to the parts below, and stretch the other ligament on top; and you separate the flesh which is between two ligaments so that it is split lengthwise so that all the flesh is exposed; and then cut or cauterize.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And let there be applied a cloth of linen to all the parts so that it does not touch the spot, and let the patient come to the doctor injured tightly bound and cauterized.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	But if it happens that there is bleeding of blood when the wounds are opened, then you should cauterize the spot tightly, or put on it some powders to stop the bleeding; and then return to your medicine so that it may be completed.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then bind the wounded member with a ligament in the most convenient way, and cure that which is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And he said to you that which was given to a man on his foot, this medicine accidentally caused him to have blackness in his foot from scorching which was likened to burning of fire.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that corruption first occurred in his toe and spread to all the foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that man prepared for himself remedies more powerful so that the cure would go to the member with the force of it, and he cauterized that foot at the joint, and healed it with fire.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	Long ago there happened to him that corruption in the finger of the hand.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then it came to me, and so I perceived that excess went over the hand with that which was placed on the hand of medicines, then the purification of the body; and the excess was not stopped and began going to another finger as it began in the hand.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And he called me to cut off the hand of it, and I did not want to do that hoping about the effect of that excess, but when I saw that I had to cut off the hand of it dead, for the virtue of the patient was greater than usual.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And since he despaired of me, he returned to his land and it happened to him that that man prepared and cut off all his hand, and it was healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I have not added this narrative except that it be an aid to what is taken from this illness, and that it be a sign by which it is understood and according to which it is done.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	Of cure of ulcers and quality of cauterization with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When there happens suppuration in some fleshy members and the suppuration is prolonged so that it makes collection of pus, and then it becomes broken and perforated, and the pus has been discharged from it, and the hole is opened as if it were a vessel, and there is not any impression on bone or on ligament, it is called sinuous, and if it does not become suppurative, and does not make fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	But however, if the suppuration is prolonged so that the corruption infects some member, then it is called fistula and not ulcer.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And the cure of it is that you cut off that vein all around as it is turned, and more greatly when it is cauterized and made with a cloth, and cauterize that not adheres to the spot because of its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	But if you expect that the vein adheres and that corruption does not have happened because of the former cauterization, and in the vein there has been a passage of face, then you cure it with an ointment.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And if you consider that sinuousness, and then it is great, and the arm which is seen has a fetid odor, then cauterize it with Egyptian medicine which is made of oil and vinegar and resin mixed together, and let them be applied on the wound in an ointment, and let them be tied over the fire so that the medicine melts.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And then you take what is necessary from him and dissolve it with water and honey; and you enema the rectum with that, and strengthen its opening, and leave the medicine in there for the amount of two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And then you extract that with a sponge; and do this for as many days until the rectum is cleansed and the wound is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And sometimes it is enema with ash water when you do not have this medicine available; and you take ashes from wood and put water on it; and then you strain that and enema with it until you are convinced that the rectum is healed.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the patient cannot tolerate the Egyptian medicine or ash water, then enema with water and honey with ground zinnias mixed in it, and enema with wine and honey mixed together as well since the property of honey is to cleanse and wash while wine adheres to the rectum and especially when there is excess of dryness and stiffness.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you do this several times and you are convinced that the rectum is healed, then enema with something that makes the flesh grow back in there.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And you should take a thin ointment and dissolve it with rose oil and styptic wine, or you can enema with some other medicines and ointments that have the properties I have already written about in the treatise on ointments.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the opening of the rectum is narrow and cannot receive the tip of the syringe, then you should gradually enlarge it with a small iron instrument and place a sponge wrapped in Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment inside until it is enlarged.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And similarly, if the opening is large, then you sew up the edges of it and leave a quantity in which the syringe can fit without adding anything to it.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the opening from which the intestine hangs is elevated upwards towards the upper parts, then dry that place with pus in the lower part so that the intestine can hang down, for when the intestine is constricted in the depth of the rectum the flesh is generated there.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it is not possible for you to dry the rectum within the range of the pus base as you want, then you will be forced to prepare that member with preparation so that the intestine runs slightly according to how you see fit and so that there is no cause for the intestine to be retained in there.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And take consolidating medicines that are placed on the rectum conveniently according to what you want so that they extend onto the sheet.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And the sheet should be of such a large quantity as to make contact with the whole rectum; and then insert forceps into the right side of the rectum opening a little larger than the rectum opening, and extend over another sheet on the sheet some leons according to the size of the incision, and place that above in a distant position from the rectum opening so that the exit of the intestine is not blocked by the sheet and does not close it up but only for one day at a time.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	But the one that is over the rectum opening, which heals throughout the hour on its own as it dries out whatever is inside the intestine.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And so that you can tell if what comes out of the intestine is a lot or little, or digested, or not digested.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And with that you consider the place of that rectum, if the patient feels pain there or not, and if there is an abscess there.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And when your treatment is prolonged in this manner, and you see the matter that is excreted over the rectum opening already adhered or a formed adhesion, then you loosen it on the third day, and when you loosen the plaster, then you change the sheet and renew the ointment.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	But if a subtle humor exudes from the rectum for a long space of time, then do not despair about the adhesion to it, for its healing is proper, for some people have slow generation of flesh in their plasters while others have the opposite happen to them.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if the intestine exudes undigested food for several days, then you know that the rectum does not adhere; and if the adhesion of the rectum is delayed and the cause prolonged, then you reduce the moisture in the medicines, and if the medicines are wet in their substance and in their strength, they are dried as with thin ointment when there is excess of addition of wax.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the best medicine with which it is treated is to take thin ointment and dissolve it in rose oil, and put over it old wine in its substance, and then you test that on it and use it.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And when there is no intestine, use thin ointment, honey when it has been cooked until it is thickened, and use it; or take myrrh and aloe, and grind them both and powder them over the honey as it sits on the fire, and then smear that on a sheet and strengthen it over the rectum; and smear it with the honey which you have cooked until it is thickened, and powder it on a sheet and strengthen it.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And sometimes they are administered with a long aristology and roots of celestial lily (and it is celestial lily) and farina of worms and centaurea, and use those simples or adjust, grind them and sift the powder over the honey which you have cooked; and use it.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the rectum is prolonged and not healed by this treatment, then you know that the corruption is in its depth, and then it makes an incision in the bones or other hard members or tendons; then you treat it with a fistula treatment as mentioned above.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	Of treatment of panarici and nail scrapings and added digit incision and section.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Panarici is an abscess that arises under the nail of the finger of the hand or the toe, and strongly affects the other fingers, and when it is prolonged and its healing is slow, or is an abscess of cauterized abscess, or is corrupted, and it causes intestine to run inside which corrodes the roots of the nail, and strongly corrupts all that, and strongly permeates its corruption into the bone within which there is a foul odor, and the extremity of the finger is affected, and its color becomes dark.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And therefore when you have that with what we have said in the division and do not bring about your healing, then cover that with iron completely over all the superfluity which is raised from the nail and then cauterize the wound indeed, for cauterizing quickly helps in that.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is intact and the nail is healed, and the additions of the nail grow again into the fingers, and they begin to puncture and pierce it, then cover that with a thin thread under the angle of the nail which punctures the flesh, and push it upwards and insert the flesh with ease, and put over that medicines that burn corrosively so that everything is healed. And then treat that with ointments so that it is healed.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	But if the corruption has already permeated into the bone, then cover that and extract it, for there is no time when it will be healed as long as the bone is corrupted.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the rottenness and corruption go into the finger, then insert that into one of the nuts according to how it is affected, and then treat that so that it is healed.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	But if the nail has a concussion or abrasion, and it has pain there at the beginning, then cover that with fleubotomes on the patient, and then dry the nail with a pointed spatulum with a transverse section on it above, and be careful that the section does not permeate into the flesh underneath the nail, for you will cause violent pain to the patient, and you will increase the cause of pain to the nativitas of the flesh with superfluous generation in the place; and then treat that place with what reduces pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	This text is indeed a mixture of several languages! I will do my best to provide a translation:
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And some of them are born in the root of the joint, or their origin is in some nuts of the fingers.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	He who is born in some fingers of the hand is not bad, and he who is born in the joints is very painful.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And of those who are born fleshy, the incision is easier, and you should insert it into its root with a spatulate instrument.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	But of him who is born in the root of the joint, the cure is difficult; therefore beware of its dissection.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But for him who is born in the finger joints, you must insert at the beginning into the flesh with a round incision within the bone, and then cut with one of those saws appropriate to that, and then cure that within which is healed.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	But the consolidation which happens to the fingers between them, whether due to swelling or by the nature of the person who is born like that, or due to the hardening of a wound, or due to burning fire, or due to something similar, then you must cut that consolidation so that the fingers return to their natural shape.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And then place between them fabrics soaked in rose oil so that they are not consolidated quickly, and separate those fabrics, or place between them a thin lead plate so that it is consolidated according to the person.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And similarly, if consolidation happens in some fingers with the palm, then you must cut that consolidation according to how it is prepared and convenient for the figure of the member.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	Of incisions of vultures, they are varicose.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Varicose veins are varicose, and they are thick wrapped veins full of melancholy superfluities which come in movements of the body's parts, and their greatest occurrence is in the legs, especially in the legs of travelers, laborers, and carriers.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Therefore, you should administer the purging of the body from black cholera several times with strong expulsion, and then let the patient bleed from the basilic vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	But the cure of them is according to two ways: one is that it is cut and the black blood is drawn out; the other way is that the vein is elevated and all of it is extracted.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The incision of it is according to this way: moisten the leg at the beginning with warm water so that the gross blood is dissolved, which is feculent from the leg, and then tighten the patient's leg at the highest part of the thigh into the highest part of the crotch with a bandage, and then cut the vein in one, or two, or three places with a broad incision, and then elevate the black blood with your hand from the lower part of the leg upwards, inside out, so that the amount of blood you want to be expelled is expelled, and which the strength of the patient can bear.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And then ligate that, and command him to abstain from cholera-black generating foods.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And repeat the cure by phlebotomy when the veins are full and this is noticed by the patient.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	But the elevation of them is according to this way: you raise the leg of the patient, if it is moved by them, and then put him in a bath and moisten his leg with warm water so that it softens and the veins are dilated; or that he be exercised by strong exercise, if a bath is not available to you, so that the member is heated.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And then cut the cord in the direction of the vein by incision in the long or behind him according to the leg due to the thigh, or in the bottom due to the foot.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And then open the cord with uncios and gouge out the vein from every part so that it appears to the sense, and it is necessary for you to notice that this changes into blackness.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And so, with the evaporation of it and of the cord, you will see that white one is stringy.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And then you put that down with a ligature so that it is elevated and drained of the cord, and suspend that with golden wire.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	And then cut another incision just below that incision for three fingers, and then gouge out the cord from above the vein so that it appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	And then elevate that and insert that into the posterior incision due to the foot, and then extract that and elevate it so that it is expelled by the second incision, and then extract that from the incision which is above that.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And do that so that you extract it from the incision which is highest or highest of all the incisions, so that all of it is expelled; and then insert that.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if it does not obey you to extract and elevate, then insert a strong bent needle into the vein and ligate that and extract it, or insert below the leg and revolve your hand around all parts so that it is pressed.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And beware that it is not cut; because if it is broken, it is made difficult for you to elevate that part and it has come over the patient through that harm.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when all of it has been expelled, then place over the location of the wound wool soaked in wine and rose oil and not-rose oil, and cure that so that it is healed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the vein is contracted having tortuosity to which there is an envelopment at the parts, and it is not according to rectitude as we have said, then you must split that at all parts of its tortuosity and of its envelopment, and then suspend that with uncios so that you elevate that entirely.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And beware that you do not cut the vein and plague it, for it is difficult for you to elevate it; and use your prudence in that.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	The form of the incision by which it is dried out:
Forma de unci orp:	Form of an oil ointment:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It should not be applied like nails nor have an acute edge so that it does not cut the vein; and it has a thick flexibility of lion, for if it were thin, it would cut into the vein by its thinness; excess thickness is found in it as we have said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	Here is the provided text for accurate translation:
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is generated in the legs in tail-like lands like Al-Ategi in the land of Arabs and in tail-like and arid lands of little tenderness where there is no grass or herbage.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And soon it is generated in other parts of the body besides the legs.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And its gestation is from putrefaction that comes under the skin like venom inside the body of serpents and worms and shrimps and worms generated between the skin and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	And the sign of the occurrence of it is that this vein happens in the leg with violent inflammation; and soon the place becomes vesicated, and soon the vein begins to come out of the place of that vesication like the root of a plant.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And then when you see the end of it, then you should wrap around that a piece of lead of which its weight is two drachms, and hold that and let the lead hang from the chest.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And as many times as it goes out because of some cause, wrap it in lead and leave that there.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if it is prolonged, then you must cut into it and wrap the remaining part; and do not cut into that which has come out so that it may be outside as it was previously, for if you cut into that, it is contracted and goes inside the flesh and causes abscess and putrefaction in the place and a bad ulcer.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	So that it should be treated gently and extracted little by little, while it is pushed out of its end and not drawn back in any way into the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And from this vein there is issued in some men something that is in its length of six or ten palms, and I have seen one that was twenty palms.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is cut into at the time of its medication, then insert the needle into its opening and pierce that with a long needle into the body until all that is in the matter is evacuated, and administer putrefaction of the place for some days with medicines; and then heal that with the healing of abscesses.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein sometimes has painful spasms, and especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and painful movements come to it, and it is issued from each opening like a ram.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And then heal that as we have said in the division and with what is above said.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	Of cutting above worms generated under the skin and it is called bovine illness.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This illness is named in some lands as bovina due to the fact that it sometimes affects oxen and it is a worm which is generated between the skin and the flesh, and goes throughout the body pushing and penetrating, and it is shown through the feeling of its movement from one limb to another as it breaks the skin and comes out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And its generation is from putrefaction of some humors as happens with worms and serpents and earthworms and roundworms in the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is feared for its wickedness, for when it goes in the body and is elevated to the head and has come to the throat, then it breaks out and penetrates and destroys the throat, and that therefrom many times.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And therefore when you want to heal and extract it, then it is not done unless through its walking and appearance to the feeling, and then when you press what is above it and what is below it with strong binding and contraction, and then dry over it and extract it.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is buried in the flesh and you do not cut it out, then you place cautery with fire over the place where it lives, and the greatest cause that is feared is corruption of it by which it corrupts the place as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	But if you want that to come to the head near the throat, then bind strongly over the forehead and press over it and extract it; and when the patient uses cleansing of his body with evacuating medicines and abstains from food generating putrefaction, then he guards himself from bad and putrid humors.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	Of cutting above the illness of the navel.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This illness is named in our land as navel, and it is a pain that comes to some limbs, and soon it is moved from limb to limb.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And I will tell you about that according to what he tells me.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	He went to a wicked woman in a village, and discovered her arm and saw a small inflammation on the vein of the arm, and as the pus had come out for an hour, he saw that inflammation go as if it were quicksilver when it moves from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then it went to the pain of that place and pierced into the muscle, and soon he stayed there for an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And then it went through the other body until it came to the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And then he told me that it revolved through all his body as he saw; and was too marveled by its transformation and the quickness of moving from limb to limb.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And he had seen before that in my own body according to that way, but he had seen move which bear pain being transferred from limb to limb.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	But I did not see it with the arms like in the woman.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I did not think it was that but that it is because the woman was of such age, of old body and of uncovered veins, and in this appeared to the feeling that wrinkledness transferred.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that it does not appear according to this back-cure in those who are delicate and of body with humors mixed with veins.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And when you want its cure and the patient feels that pain, then it is not for you to appear to the throat as we have said, but you bind over that and push it gently and dry over it until that wrinkledness is released, and cauterize the place.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	But if you do not see it in your own arms, then you heal that with an emission of the body and with what expels wrinkledness, and cauterize those with foul-smelling poultices and with poultices of serapium and similar things.
De extraccio de sagetas.	Of extraction of arrows.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrows are diversified according to spices, and according to the places of the body in which they are placed, for their diversity is that some have great points, and small, and concave, and hollow, and from them that have three angles, and those to which there are tongues; and from those to which there are astels.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And this is the second [method] for members and bones, in which there are two manners: for the members are either principal causes, as the brain, heart, liver, lungs, intestines, bladder, and their likes; and therefore when you feel pain in any of these members, and it signals death to you, which cause I will recite later, then you should avoid extracting that arrow in those where death is certain in the one who feels that pain in the most serious dispositions, and when that pain does not appear, and the arrow is not hidden in the depth of the member, then you extract it and cure the wound.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And the signs of the soul are when an arrow pierces him, and penetrates the bone, and is situated in the sipho which is above the brain, because it happens through it violently, and scotomata, and vertigo, and burning in the eyes, and inflammation and heat of the tongue, and spasm and confusion of the mind and vomiting of bile, and the speech is very feeble and destroyed, and there comes out of the site of the wound a white humidity similar to pus, and his eyes are like water.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And therefore if you see these signs, then you abstain from the cure and the extraction of the arrow, unless it is exposed.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	But the signs of the arrow when it pierces the heart are that it is near the left nipple, and one feels that it has been struck with a hard object, and it is not a superficial wound; and soon the movement of the arrow is similar to the movement of the pulse, and black blood flows from the wound, and there is coldness in the extremities, and a hissing sound, and syncope; and therefore know that death is descending with certainty.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And the signs when the arrow has wounded the lungs are foaming blood coming out of the wound, and the vessels near the neck are swollen, and the color of the patient changes, and he breathes heavily, and demands frequent breathing.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the arrow pierces the membrane which is in the chest, then the pain is near the small ribs, and there is made a great wound with violent pain and with sighing, and not all the members of the muscles are affected.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if the arrow pierces the stomach, then soon you will see from the wound some undigested food.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if the arrow pierces the abdomen and is stuck in it, you will see some slit in the wound, or the membrane, or intestine which is torn, and there is no hope for cure by extracting the arrow.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the arrow pierces the bladder and urine flows out of it, and some cause processes outside of it to the exit, and there is strong pain on the patient, then know that it is deadly.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	But the other members, such as the face, neck, collarbone, shoulders, vertebrae of the back, sternum, thigh, and their likes of the members, are saved according to the most serious dispositions when the arrow does not hit a vein or artery, and is not a venomous arrow.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I will recite to you what I have seen of the nature of these arrows, so that you may understand through this about your cure.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The cause of which is that in a man who has an arrow in the tear duct of his eye socket in the root of his nose, if I extract that from him from the other side, below the gray matter of his brain, he will be healed and no harm will come to his eye.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And I extracted another arrow from a Jew who had it in the gray matter of his eye socket, below the eyelid, and the arrow was already hidden and he did not get anything from it except for a small extremity with which it adhered to his socket; and it was a great arrow of the sharp arrows of the Turks, with a lion's ferrule at its tip, and in which there were no eyelids.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And the Jew was healed, and no harm came to his eye.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And I extracted another arrow from a Christian man who had it in his collarbone, and it was an Arabic arrow, and it is the one which has eyelids; and then I inserted that between two fingers, and it was already submerged in his collarbone; and then I pulled it out with subtlety, and he was healed.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And I extracted another arrow from a man who had it in his abdomen, and I thought that he would die from it; and therefore, since he had passed 30 days and there was no change in his dispositions, I inserted into the arrow and probed it, and he was healed, and no harm came to him.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And I saw a man in whom an arrow had pierced his back, and the wound had healed over him, and after fire had burned it for about seven years, the arrow came out in the root of his thigh.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And I saw a woman in whom an arrow had pierced her abdomen, and the wound had healed over her, and she did not change in her dispositions for many years, and the woman did not suffer any harm in any of her natural functions.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And I saw another man to whom an arrow had pierced his face and the wound had healed over it, and the arrow was broken, not causing any pain here, and similar signs to these.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And I extracted the arrow from the king's son who had it in the middle of his nose, and he had already turned to the right a little, and the entire arrow was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And I was called to cure him when the arrow entered three days ago.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then I probed the wound of the arrow carefully, and he did not feel it; but he felt a pain below the right eyelid, and then I perceived that this pain was from the tip of the arrow.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And I applied the location with a plaster in which is vertute atractive and digestive, believing that the location would become apparent to me as the location of the arrow, so that it would dry over it.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And there happened no significant accident that the arrow had reached that location; and I continued with the plaster on it for several days, and there happened nothing; and the wound healed in between, and the wound of its extraction closed up within the space of several days, until one day he felt the arrow inside his nose and made me aware of it.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then I applied sharp and corrosive medicine to the wound for several days until pus came out, and with probing I felt that, and discovered the tip of the arrow which adhered to the socket.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And then I applied the perception of the wound with that sharp medicine until the tip of the arrow appeared to me visibly, and I passed through time with it for the space of four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And then, since the wound was enlarged, and it became possible for me to insert the forceps into him without resistance, I did not cease probing and manipulating that wound with various instruments, until one day I began on that wound with forceps made for descentment, according to the shape of which in the end of the chapter, until I extracted it; and then I restored that wound.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And some doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose was not restored, and I restored that and the wound healed over it, and the patient was healed with complete health, and nothing bothered him.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	I will remind you of the quality of extraction of some arrows so that you pause this rule and significance on what I have not said, because the parts of this art and their definitions are not understood by narration or do not understand the book.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the wise artisans compare a few things about motion; and what is present about what is absent, and find a new operation and a new instrument that must be descended from strange causes of the art when they happen.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And therefore I say that arrows are not forgotten in the members in which they are placed, but according to two ways: either by attraction of the place in which they enter or by the contrary of the other party.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is forgotten by the location where it is entered, or an arrow proceeding in a fleshy place, and it is shot and forgotten.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if it does not obey the time in which it falls, then you should leave it for several days until the meat around it grows and is healed, and its attraction and exit are relieved.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	And similarly, if it is placed in the bone and does not obey you in time, then leave it for several days and repeat that with attraction and motion every day, and it will be forgotten.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if it does not obey you after several days, then you should bore in the circuit of the arrow into that bone from all sides with a very thin tool until the place is enlarged by the arrow, and then extract it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the arrow is placed in the bone of the head and has already proceeded into one of the ventricles of the brain, and appears in the patient some of those accidents which I said, then abstain from extracting the arrow and leave it until its essence is equalized over several days; because if the arrow pierces the skull, death is not prolonged for him.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrow is not placed except in the body of the bone only and does not pass into the brain, and he remains for several days, and none of those accidents happen to him, then you should act on the attraction of the arrow and his attraction.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	But if it is shot and does not obey your extraction, then you should administer tools in the circuit of the arrow as we have recommended, and then heal the place where it is healed.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	But if the arrow is already hidden in the place of the body, and is hidden from feeling, then you should inquire about it with touch, and if you feel it, then shoot it with some tools that are appropriate for its attraction.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot act on it due to the constriction of the membrane and the length of the bone, and there is no bone or nerve or vein, then you should open the membrane so that it is enlarged and that it is possible to extract the arrow.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if you are acting on it with ears that are held, then loosen the meat in which it is placed all around with every tool you can; and act on that, if you cannot act on the emission of the meat in the fracture of the ears and in their torsion so that it obeys.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in any place where it is, then use with twisting of your hand with forceps to all parts so that he obeys; and subtly with great subtlety so that the arrow is not broken and that it is difficult for you to attract him and extract him.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot act on that for a while, then leave it for several days until the parts that are in his circuit grow, and then repeat that because it has been relieved by then.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	But if you are contrary to the flow of blood, then administer what we have said about healing in its chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And guard your virtue from cutting of vein or nerve, or string, and act in every possible way to you of the emission of the arrow; and do that with ease and tranquility and slowness and firmness as I have recommended to you and to you.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And therefore, do that to contract the arrow so that the patient is according to the figure according to which you must aim the shot of the arrow at him, for it is more beneficial.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	But if that is not possible for you, then administer what is possible for you by the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	But the arrows that are forgotten by the contrary of the other party, or that have already proceeded from him to the outside parts, or make darkness in the extremity of the arrow by feeling of the part above the joint nearest and often touch that; then you cut about it; and let the incision be according to the amount in which the forceps take hold of it; and then shoot it, for it is made easier to him.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	But if it is retained in the bone, then you twist the blade according to the contrary so that the arrow presses on the bone, and enlarge yourself, and then extract it.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	And if not, leave it for several days, and then repeat that until it becomes easier.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the shaft of the arrow is in it, then you push him with it.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	But if the shaft is broken and you want to administer impulse, then you enter it into him, if it is hollow, a tool bent so that it enters into the concavity of it in the head of the arrow, and then push it with him.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	But if the arrow is hollow, then you push that with a strong tool entering into it, for the arrow is relieved by it.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the arrow is poisoned, then open all the meat in which its venom is, as much as you can do that, and then heal it with whatever is convenient for you.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the arrow falls in the foot, or in the belly, or in the bladder, or in the side, and is near so that you touch it with feeling, and you can act on it, then act on it and beware of cutting of vein or nerve, and extract it, and then close the membrane if it bleeds, and heal it until it is healed.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Form of forceps with which arrows are pulled out:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	And when you want to shoot an arrow at someone, then push it with some tools that you hold in your hand. Let the ends of them be like the beak of a bird that are made with a saw when they grasp the arrow so that they do not let go.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And they are made in various shapes, large, small and medium-sized, according to the amount of the size of the arrow and its weakness, and of the width of it, and of its constriction.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	Form of the bent end with a hollow cavity like a bird's beak so that the instrument of the arrow is relieved in it, and the push of that hollow one:
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Form of the bent end of the hollow one:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	so that its instrument is relieved in the hollow arrow and is pushed by that.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	Of phlebitis of the veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so .xxx., de las quals so en le cap .xvi., so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins of phlebitis of which usually run from .xxx. which are in the head .xvi., so are two pulsating veins which are near the ears, they say alhasisain; two herbs that are on both temples appear to be apparent; and two veins that are on two lacrimal of two holes that are called ascentics; and the vein prepared in the middle of the forehead, and the vein that is at the end of the nose; and two guides that are at the neck; and two veins that are on the lip above; and two veins that are on the lip below; and — these are the veins that are called algelic —; and so two veins that are below the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so .v.; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	But the veins that are phlebotomized in the arms are .v. There is one of those that is a cephalic vein, and it receives the wild side; and the people call it "the head vein", and it is deaf, and it is a small vein, and it is composed of a branch of the basilica, and from another branch of the cephalic; and the people call that the "vein of all the body", and the basilica is the vein which is stopped on the domestic side, and is called "citillar", and the vulgar call it "the belly vein"; and the funis of the arm, and it is stopped over the fire, and it is that in which phlebotomy is done, and it is that which appears above the elbow by a manifest appearance; and salvatella, and it is the vein between the said ear and the smaller one, and it has two ramps.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And in the foot and the leg there are three veins; one of those is below the curvature of the jaw of the wild side; and the second is sophena, and its location is below the leg of the domestic side; and the sciatic vein, and its location is below the leg of the wild side; and in the leg are other veins similar to those.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The cause of the veins that are near the ears is from old catarrhs and migrations and ancient bad ulcers of the head.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of bleeding those is according to what you count for yourself: it is that you wash the head of the patient, and wash the head of the patient in the occipital region in the place of both veins with a broad cloth with good friction; then tighten the patient his neck with a bandage inside which appear the two and their places are near the ears at two points from the head; and feel those with your finger, and if you feel the pulse of them with your finger, here is the sign with a tent.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Then you take the cutting scalpel, and it is that which is incident, and then you insert that below the vein into the vein within which the phlebotomy comes to the bone.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And then raise your hand with the vein and the bone to the parts above and insert the vein with an incident incision.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And let the length of the incision be the quantity of two fingers placed or around that; and let the blood flow as much as you want.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then tighten with powder and leave that until it is healed.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And now I have preceded in the beginning of the book the incision of those and their cauterization.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	But from the two veins of the arteries that are in the temples, the cause of phlebotomy is an ancient migration and a bad habit and a constant eye disease and a body of sharp acute superfluities flowing to the eyes.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of bleeding those is according to what you count for yourself: constrict the patient his neck so that the two veins appear to the sense by a manifest appearance and the pulse of them below your finger; and then you sign with a tent.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And then you raise the bone above the vein to the parts above with your finger indicating, and insert phlebotomy below incident, and raise the vein above; and insert that as well as you have done in the two other veins; and let the blood flow according to the quantity of your need.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then loosen the constriction of the patient's neck, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, and then place a knot and powder on that and tighten that above with strong constriction, and leave that until it is healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And now is preceded the remembrance of them, and of those the incision, and the attraction in the beginning of the book.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And therefore the cause of phlebotomy of the vein of the forehead is the phlebotomy of the cephalic to the ancient illnesses of the face and to migration and redness and smelly ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of bleeding it is according to what you count for yourself; it is that the patient constricts his neck with a bandage so that the vein appears; and then take the instrument which is called "fessori", of which this is the form of it:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Place the point that is on the top of the fessori over that vein and percute on it with a needle or with another cause in the manner of it, and let the blood flow according to the quantity which you want; and then loosen the perforation of the patient's neck and tighten that until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	And sometimes it is opened with phlebotomy of the ear, however not so that the phlebotomy is of acute extremity as well as other phlebotomies, but of lateral extremity, and phlebotomize that according to the transverse, because the bone is close and would break it strongly in it the phlebotomy when it is subtle.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	But the cause of the two veins that are in the tear ducts of both eyes by roughness of the eyes by redness and tearing in the eyes, and to the illnesses of the face.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	And the quality of bleeding is that the patient constricts his neck with a bandage, and then phlebotomize those, and you may stand over the head of him.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And let the phlebotomy be made according to the transverse at length of a little with phlebotomy of little, because in the place there is no flesh; and if the phlebotomy is subtle, strongly its extremity is broken.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then cause blood to flow as much as is necessary for you, and pause over those spots, and tighten them for one night, and then loosen them.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	But the phlebotomy of the nose vein is applied to acute fever and violent heat, and to illnesses of the face, and emigration and redness that occur in the face, and especially when it is chronic.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the nature of his phlebotomy is that the patient tightens his neck and then touches his nose with your left hand, and takes the phlebotomy needle and inserts it into the middle place of the head of the nose according to its direction, because the vein does not appear to you here, and because the blood begins to flow immediately.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	When you have finished with the phlebotomy needle little by little and caused blood to flow according to your need, then ligate it for one night, because that is restored quickly.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	But the use of phlebotomy of the two veins leads to constriction of the throat and the beginning of leprosy and many illnesses, and impulsive and bad corrosive ulcers, just as with herpes.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And the nature of phlebotomy from those is that the patient tightens both under his neck with a bandage; and the operator stands over the head of the patient, and the patient sits on a stool.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	And then phlebotomize the vein along its length with a small, wide phlebotomy needle little by little; and extract blood according to a moderate quantity or according to what you see is necessary for it; and then do likewise on the other vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And then loosen the bandage and tighten the two veins with a looser bandage so that the patient is not overwhelmed, and let him go into the mat that the plague is healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	And the use of phlebotomy from the veins of the arms leads to small abscesses and pustules in the mouth and corruption of the gums and bad ulcers and fissures, and to bad ulcers that are in the nose and around it.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	And the nature of phlebotomy from those is that you make the patient face away from you and tighten his neck with a bandage, and then turn back the lips of him and observe two veins from which one is from the right side of the lip and the second from the left; and the demonstration of each is by the darkness of each of both, and that more so because in the circuit of those are minute black veins; and then cut into each with a cutting incision.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	But if you doubt it and do not know which is which, then go to the incision of the largest of those, and of the most obvious pus from those.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And do likewise on the two veins that are in the lips above.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	But custom is to cut more into the two veins that are in the lip below.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	But from two veins that are below the tongue, the use is the phlebotomy of the cephalic one to illnesses in the gullet, to the illness of the uvula, and to illnesses of the mouth.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And the nature of phlebotomizing those is that you follow the patient between your fingers in front of the sun, and raise his tongue, and observe below the tongue, from one side of him the vein comes and from the other side the vein comes, and the color of each is declining to blackness.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And then phlebotomize each one; and be careful not to finish your hand in phlebotomizing those, because below those are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the veins that are phlebotomized in the head are those in which blood usually flows in all men, and the phlebotomy of them is done according to two methods, either with the mirtilat or olive needle declining in subtlety; or cutting with a scalpel, and it is called if alnessil, and this is its form:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this alnessil is that it suits to section and of those are special sides and thin according to the width of the veins and according to the tightness of them.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Form of mirtilat phlebotomy:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	Let the side of him be thus with sight, and it suits to open the concave veins full proceeding apparent thick ones, and to those that contain thick twisted blood.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	And this is the form of olive phlebotomy:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And this phlebotomy is of lesser width and more thin extreme, and suits the phlebotomy of thin veins that contain subtle citrus blood.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	But the use of phlebotomy from the basilic vein, which is one of three veins: because it extracts blood from illnesses that are below the gullet and the neck, and from what affects the feet and the belly.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And it suits the phlebotomizer, when phlebotomizing that one, to guard well it and be above-fearing in it, because below him there is an artery, and if he errs and pierces in the piercing of the phlebotomy, to cut into that artery and happen bleeding of blood, so that one must not phlebotomize it with a piercing needle, but rather cut into it with alnessil.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the basilic does not appear by apparent manifestation, then one must let it be and move to the other, or seek some branch of it; or phlebotomize in the end place of the arm, because that one is manifest; and cut into it with alnessil just as we have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	But if you want the phlebotomy of it meteyssa, then one must in front of the tightness of the arm touch the place between which one knows the place of the pulse, and then press on him with a bandage; and then loosen the arm and cut into the vein with a concave incision with alnessil just as we have said; and be careful not to hit the pulse for some space of the place of the artery.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	And when you see, while tightening the bandage, swelling in the place that you have pressed with a bandage, then that swelling is of the artery, and therefore loosen it.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if you see the blood flow in the phlebotomy just as the shining of a child, and the blood is subtle red, then know that it is of the blood of the artery; and therefore press and pause your thumb over it for long space; and then push your thumb, and if the blood is cut off, because many times it is cut off, then tighten the arm and let go of him.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And guard the patient of the morning of him, and be above-fearing of him and do not maltreat him for several days until he is healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	But if the blood is not cut off and you see that there is no medicine present to it, then one must cut into the artery if it appears to you; because the end of him is contracted, and the blood is cut off; or take a piece of fistic, and put on it, and take the one hand and tighten it over the place of the vein with tightness going down on the other day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And then if the blood is cut off, well; and otherwise, then heal that one with that from which it comes before the remembrance of the place of the powdered ones cut off flow of blood.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And the cutting off of blood from him is difficult in many dispositions by the small place of the plague and the possibility of the tightness of the arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	But from the dark vein the phlebotomy is use that extracts blood from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the body; because it is composed of a branch of the basilic and of the cephalic just as we have said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And one must be above-fearing in the phlebotomizing of it because below that is a nerve; and then if you pierce in the piercing of the phlebotomy and hurt the nerve, stupor will come to him, and it is difficult for him to heal, and strong he is not healed from all, and this nerve many times appears to sensation; and if it is hidden in some men and is subtle and is not manifested, then one must pause the phlebotomy with which you phlebotomize with a concave incision, and avoid the nerve with your strength.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	If the vein is between two nerves, then cut the vein in its length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The use of phlebotomy on the cephalic vein is to reduce the blood in the head and help with illnesses of the brain.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And for this specifically, if you wish to perform phlebotomy, use olive-wood or myrtle phlebotomy; for it is the safest of all veins, since no artery or nerve lies beneath it.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	But however, when you do the phlebotomy, be sure to avoid piercing the head of the lizard, and instead aim for the nearest spot, and do not press on it, unless it is detected by the first percussion that there are some veins there.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	But however, it is very rare for an aposteme to appear in some people when they are not phlebotomized on the first percussion, but do not press on that aposteme.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	But the quality of that phlebotomy and its accidents are many, in which you should consider their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first of these is that one should know that phlebotomy is not administered only for the sake of health and in anticipation of it, and to guard against the onset of illnesses, and that phlebotomy be done on one of the veins that are in the arm: cephalic, fuscus, and basilic; and that phlebotomy be done at the beginning of spring, after breakfast in spring and autumn, and in winter near the meal, when signs of fullness appear.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And phlebotomy be done on the third day or the first day after three hours have passed from the start of the day.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	But phlebotomy that is administered should be done when it is convenient and necessary, at any time of the night or day, at all hours and at all times.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And children should not be phlebotomized until they are 14 years old, and pregnant women should not be phlebotomized except from the fourth month to the seventh, and the elderly should not be phlebotomized after they have passed the age of 60.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And when someone wants to be phlebotomized for any reason, one should cleanse the intestines before phlebotomy with a lion's-wool cleansing, if there is a retained fissure in them, so that the veins do not spit out the superfluities during phlebotomy of the intestines, which are purged, and that they do not harm the principal members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And those who are phlebotomized should not be suffering from jaundice or diarrhea, nor recovering from any illness or drunkenness, and not suffering from a cold or fever, and not just after taking a bath, and not when colic is being felt, or vomiting, or pain in the belly, or multiplication of cough and fever and exertion from meals, or wakefulness, or from anything that weakens the body or animal.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And consider in subtle bleeding before this if the blood is thick, with food and drink, and with medicines if that is possible for it.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And enter into a bath if any cause does not prohibit it, or exercise in some way so that the blood is thinned out.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And pause the phlebotomy of him at the feet during the third hour of the day, as we have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And you should ensure that the feet of him are guarded during that day from all accidents of animals, as they are anguish, anger, fear, and from all bodily accidents, as they are labor and excessive pain and cough and their likes.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And to his own self, let the causes be present in the use of which, according to custom, people are healed by aromatics and ointments and balms and their likes according to the quantity of possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And the phlebotomist should follow over a cushion that is higher than the cushion of him who is to be phlebotomized.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And then stretch out his arm, and rub that with his hand the phlebotomist two or three times; and then tighten the bandage with a belt and wrap him up two times.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And the tightness should be moderate, for when the tightness is unequal or the tightness is on superfluousness, then the flow of blood is prohibited; or it is on softening, and then the blood of the body runs out.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And then the tightness, let him who is to be phlebotomized rub his hands together in between them so that the veins are puffed up and declared to the sense.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And then the phlebotomist anoint his phlebotomy with a little of ancient oil properly; and then pause his right hand's thumb over that vein from which he wants to phlebotomize so that the vein runs a little, and the percussion is pressed down because from those veins from which one draws out blood, they are stretched like cords, and from those is full of windiness, and when he pauses the phlebotomy over that it is contracted from the phlebotomy, and is drawn back the phlebotomist; and the phlebotomy does not open the vein, and if it opens it, then that vein is tightened.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And so, therefore let the phlebotomist be firm and be solicited in all these causes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And then pause the phlebotomies, but if the vein is opened in one go, let it be; and if not, you iterate that again another time over that spot a little bit, or over it with a compression, if the spot is not apostemat.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the spot is apostemat, or the patient feels faint, then you leave it for one day or two, and do not tighten the bandage, for very soon it will draw out an aposteme cauterized, nor enter into a bath.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And then repeat the phlebotomy if she has a fever.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the perception is slight and the blood flows subtly, and you fear that it does not draw out the amount of blood that one wants, then you iterate the phlebotomy in that vein according to rectitude and adjust in the perception a little bit, and do this with a compression before that spot is apostemat, for the spot is apostemat in most men from slight perception.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	But if he is already apostemat then do not iterate over him, for it does not excuse you any cause; and pause over that spot some part of the fissure of oil, for it arouses the blood of the body.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And is better in this spot than other oils.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	And similarly administer fissure of oil in every phlebotomy from which phlebotomies the veins because the prohibition of blood of the body, and do this tyriaca alfolic and sarsaparilla when it is paused over that spot, for the blood is thinned out and is moved when it is thick.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if in the spot of the phlebotomy a large aposteme is generated from many times, and especially to him who is not stat bleeding except that go, or in the perception of the vein little, then you cover it up, and pause over the spot sponge soaked in water and salt, little warmed, for it is dissolved.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And let him do this then the issue of blood from that vein with complement of him or another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if there appears in the spot for several days any blackness or viridity, do not worry about it; and if you want, pause over that any cause of aloe and of myrrh dissolved, or any cause of juice of mallows or of balm or their likes.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	And many times happens apostemes and eminences from phlebotomy of the basilic vein.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And then place your hand over it, and if you find softness under your compression on it, then that protuberance is evil and bad; and so beware of placing on it any cause of what we have said, for the arterial blood will quickly flow from it.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And make a poultice with what is stiffening it, so that the area is hardened, and then cure it with another cure until it is healed.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And draw out blood from the vein according to the amount of its virtue and according to the colour appearing over the blood according to what appears.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	For if the blood is black, then let it issue until it is red; and likewise if you see it thick, then let it issue until it becomes thin; and likewise if it is acute, let its keenness be stopped.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And for him who is full and strong and has a need of bloodletting in one sitting, let the phlebotomy of the vein be enlarged and the phlebotomies be wide.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And for him who is frail, let the contrary of this be done, and let him who draws out the blood do so in several sittings, and let the incision be narrow.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	And the best that is administered in phlebotomy of a vein is that it be a transverse section, not a puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	And this manner of phlebotomy is safe from blood flow and incision of nerves, and it is more praiseworthy and safer than phlebotomy according to width and length.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And to whom it is accustomed to occur fainting because of phlebotomy, let you cure him before the phlebotomy with a little bread soaked in wine of myrrh or simple oxymel warmed; and draw out some of his blood in three or four sittings.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if it is paleness of complexion, then take before the phlebotomy bread soaked in myrrh syrup or in spiced honey syrup with pepper, cinnamon, ginger and similar things, or in scented syrup and very odorous.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if fainting occurs because of phlebotomy, and it is caused by much blood loss, then let him take to drink water with meat and scented syrup very subtle; and use aromaticity with hellebore, and let his feet be bound with that.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use the other causes that we have spoken of in the division in the chapter on fainting by evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And who wants to empty his arm and dissolve his blood second time, let him of whom the phlebotomy is for great evacuation, and whose virtue is cold, evacuate the blood little by little according to the amount of his virtue in continuous days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	But who wants to empty his arm and let out his blood second time, and whose body is strong, then do that about seven or nine hours from the first phlebotomy.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	But who wants to draw out blood from his body contrary to the side to which it declines, let him be bled in the second or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	But the body in which much blood has already been drawn and is acute and fever occurs, let him have blood taken from him in one sitting and let a great quantity be taken from him and let the incision be enlarged so that fainting does not occur, for you will have observed all the conditions of phlebotomy; and let you place your hand over his pulse because of the blood of the body, lest he die from fainting, for many times this happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And do not, when you want to loosen the arm and evacuate blood second time, when the orifice of the vein is already closed and the issuing of blood is difficult, press upon it with vehemence and the extended arm be bent slightly, for that is very bad.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Let him be bled until it is finished; or remove that with the acuteness of the phlebotomy which coagulates the blood in the orifice of the vein; or place over that tyrian rose, or sage, and compress that with slight compression until the blood has issued forth.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein is inflamed, then leave that and do not touch it until the inflammation subsides.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if the need compels you to evacuate blood second time and there is no excuse, then let him be bled on that location or on the other arm in another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the vein called “the strings of the arm” is bled in the place of the cubital or basilic vein when they are not found or are hidden, for it is composed of those.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient immerses his hand in warm water so that the vein swells and appears manifestly.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	And then let it be bound over that with a ligature by slight compression; and phlebotomize according to the transverse slightly, not according to width nor length.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And let the incision be enlarged and let your phlebotomy be over that joint by a little.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if the flow of blood is prohibited, then you repeat the hand in warm water and let the blood run in the water until you perceive your need.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	But if you are in the days of summer, then you will be excused from repeating the hand in warm water, and let the body of blood be bathed in warm water in winter time.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And the phlebotomy of this vein is safer than all other veins, for beneath it there is no pulsating vein nor nerve.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And the phlebotomy of the upper part of the right hand is suitable for diseases of the liver.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of that phlebotomy is that you compress the hand by ligature or with your hand, for you have immersed it in warm water, so that the vein is inflamed and has become manifest; and phlebotomize that transversely; and if you incise it from everywhere, it will harm nothing.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And observe that you do not pierce your hand with the phlebotomy, for beneath are the nerves of the fingers stripped of flesh.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And then immerse the hand in warm water and let the blood run in that, for if you do not immerse that in warm water, the blood will coagulate in the orifice of the vein and flow is prohibited.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And when the blood is drawn according to the amount of need, then you place over the vein olive oil and salt, so that it is not consolidated hard; and likewise let him who makes the incision in all limbs be strict.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	But the advantage of the phlebotomy of that of the left hand is that it is suitable for diseases of the spleen.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And do likewise in the phlebotomy of that just as you have done in the other.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And the advantage of the phlebotomy of that vein is for diseases which are below in the body, just as those of the uterus, and to retention of menstruation, and to diseases of the joints and old ulcers of thighs and legs, and to their like diseases.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	And the quality of that phlebotomy is that the patient immerses his foot in warm water and rubs over it so that the veins appear; and tie over the joint of the foot with a bandage; and let the location of the vein be marked by the tip of the finger pushing, and from that ramify into the fascia of the foot many branches.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And then phlebotomize the most ample vein or below the leg from where the toe deviates, for it is better and safer.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	If there is bleeding in the face of the foot, then you must be careful of the nerves that are below it on the surface of the foot, and apply your phlebotomy with which you phlebotomize across them, as if you were going to incision.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And let the phlebotomies be stopped.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	But if the flow of blood is prohibited; then you repeat the foot in the cold water and let the blood run into that place where it was evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the phlebotomist makes a mistake in the first turn, then repeat with the phlebotomy on top of it a little, because the place is salty; and do not be afraid of it being bad for you, but rather guard against the nerves as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And similarly, do the sole of the other foot in the same way.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And from the sciatic vein, the place is as we have said, under the talus below the ankle of the wild tree.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And the youth of his phlebotomy is in pain of the hip when it is for hot blood.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the quality of his phlebotomy is that the patient enters a bath, and rushes and tightens the scrotum from the side of the broad between above the talon above four fingers in one long slender bandage, because it does not appear except through that.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And therefore when it appears, then you phlebotomize that according to each device that is possible for you and according to the cross, and it is better; or incise that by incision or cut it by section, because the place of it is salty.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And it is in most men hidden; and if you find that, and it does not appear to the feeling of all, then phlebotomize some ram of it, and it is that which appears on the back of the foot under the little finger and the ring finger.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And guard against the nerves, and let the blood flow as much as you want.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	Then loosen the tightness and place it on the site of the phlebotomy tightly and firmly, because it is more likely to be healed.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Of ventilation and the qualities of using those.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Ventozes are of horns, or of ram, or of skin.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	And ventilation is done according to two methods: one of them is with scarification and extraction of blood, and the other is ventilation without scarification.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this ventilation which is without scarification is according to two methods, because either it is with fire or without fire.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And the vents which are administered with scarification and extraction of blood are xii locations on the body, of which one in which vents are placed is alnocrati, and it is the back part of the head; and the middle place of it from two parts of the neck; and vents of the chin under the jawbone below the mouth; and vents of two spatulas; and vents of alohoster, and it is on the end of the nose; and vents of two little holes, and they are of two arms; and vents of two ankles; and vents of two thighs.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	And ventilation does not extract blood except from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and for that it does not have the virtue through them as it is clearly through phlebotomy; nor believe that ventilation be done with fire or without fire in any disease made by fullness within which the whole body is evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	But if necessity prompts for ventilation in disease or in continuous, then administer that at any time at the beginning of the month and at its end, and in the middle of it and at any time.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The cause of this is that there are men in whom blood is multiplied within and they suffer from extraction of it by ventilation and feel heaviness and hardness in their heads; and there are those who feel fullness and heat in their faces and heads, and there are those whose faces are puffy; and there are those whose lips are split; and there are those whose sleep is disturbed, and there are those who see blood during sleep with redness and ancientness and other causes to them as they seem.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And therefore when it happens for any of those causes, and especially if it is in the third or middle of the month, then command ventilation be done after they have passed two or three hours of the day.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And the youth of ventilation of the nape is that when it confer to heaviness in the head and at what is sunk into the eye sockets; but believe that that is proper evacuation of all the body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this ventoz is in the place of phlebotomy of the cephalic.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it is not advisable to use that which is of complex friction, or in which there is phlegm, because it gives great harm to him.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And for that, do not believe that its use is for the old, and in the heads of which there are cold diseases.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	But to him on whom that is continuously done over him is made forgetfulness; and for that, do not command the venturer to pause his hand a little with the ventouse at the ends below, fearing the generation of forgetfulness.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	But ventilation of the alkehel is in place of phlebotomy of the dark vein and the basilic: and for that it confer to asthma, and to the constriction of a throat and to the splitting of the instrument of a throat, and to coughing, and to fullness.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And let the ventoz be bound a little, because if it is paused below, it generates weakness in the body and in the stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And ventilation of the alhagdahan confers to accidental pains in the head and to ophthalmia, and migraine, and pre-eye pain, and to pains in the roots of the teeth; and it is in place of phlebotomy of the basilic.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And let the commander not press his hand with scarification lest he incise the artery and light flux of blood.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And ventilation below the chin confer to alcola in the mouth, and to corruption of the gum, and to appearance to them of the diseases that are in the mouth, and stand in place of phlebotomy of the aliheric which is on the two lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	But ventilation which is done on the two spatulas confers to caphathe, which is done by fullness of heat.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And ventilation of the two holes within the little fingers confers youth of phlebotomy of three veins, that is of the basilic, dark and cephalic, because it draws blood from all those veins more tender than those thick veins within which the attraction comes to the three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And command the venturer that he does not process too much in scarification, because the place is deprived of flesh, and below it are nerves and arteries.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And it is one ventoz that with which he is ventilated over the buttocks and confers to the hemorrhoids of the anus and to the ulcers below.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And let the commander that it is a great ventoz, and that it is of ram, because the place demands a strong section; and strong its own split ventozes are subtle and let it be scarified with scarification.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	But vents of the legs are diminished for manifest diminishment, because they draw blood from all the body, and confer to old pains of the hips and of the mother, and of the bladder; and they provoke menstruation, and confer to bothor and ademil; and stand in place of phlebotomy of two sophenes, and alahorcoben, and of two ankles.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	In fact, they weaken the whole body and cause syncope in many people.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And from the hernia the aliment is brought up to the mouth, as well as from the hernias on both sides of the body.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	And the quality of the position of the hernias is that you must pause at the beginning, and allow them to heal by sucking, not prolonging the position of the hernia, but instead allowing them to heal quickly and remain stable, so that the fluids can come into alignment with each other.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not stop doing this until you see the area turn red and swell, and the blood appears.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And then you must scrape and continue with the sucking process little by little, and pay attention to the condition of the body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	For a man whose flesh is very thin in some places, one must scrape only once and not more so that the area does not become ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And command the scarifier to deepen the scraping and take a few steps back, and moderate the sucking with ease.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if the blood is thick, then one must scrape twice; for in the first scraping, the passage to the blood and its moisture is opened up.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	But in the second, it allows for a more thorough examination of the removal of the thick blood.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the blood is very fetid, then one must scrape a third time in order to achieve the desired result.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	Finally, when we wish to extract a little blood, or only a small amount, one scraping is sufficient for us.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we wish to extract a lot of blood, we must scrape with many scrapings; and if we know that the blood is thick, then one must scrape with a deep scraping.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the term for a "scraping" indicates the depth of the cut only in how it is made.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if the person's skin is thick, hard, and dark in color, then one must unt the hernia spots with something soothing and opening; in the summer time, use oil of aloe or violet oil, or almond oil, or oil from a horse's hoof; and in the winter time, use oil of snow, or oil of lily, or camomile oil, or blood, and similar substances.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the excess is thick and hard, then one must use oil of amarant, or oil of balsamita, or oil of aloe, or oil of anise, and similar substances.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	But if the person' s skin is very thin and loose, then one must avoid oiling it; instead, the hernia spots, near the hernia itself, should be washed with water and vinegar, or hot water of solatrum, or water of a horse's hoof, or water of bathwater, and similar substances.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And if the person' s blood is very moist, then wash the hernia spots with sour wine, or water of myrrh and sumac, and similar substances.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And for a person whose excess is thick, wash the hernia spots with old wine, or water of wormwood, which is marjoram, or water from anise tea, or camomile, and similar substances.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And one must guard against taking a bath after the hernia treatment; one should wait until after the person has eaten and then rest for an hour or two afterwards, and then go to sleep.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What is it that must be done before a bloodletting?
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	And if one must consider the beginning: then if the person who is to be bloodlet or bled has choler and blood that is hot and inflamed, then one should take cool things, such as milky drinks, and endive with sour wine and leeks, and poplar bud tea, and julep, and similar substances.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And give them food as well, such as poultry, and meat from young birds, and seasoned foods with vinegar, and to him similarly.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And for a person whose complexion is hot, one should drink rosewater with honey, or rosewater from poplar buds and sesame seeds, and sumac, and very fragrant wine between spring and autumn; and one should recommend to him that he drink little and eat little, and give him poultry, and cabbage, and peas, and small birds and pigeons.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And so that on the day of the hernia treatment and bloodletting, one should drink more than eat.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And one should give the person a drink of alcohol in certain hours to certain people with thrush, or medication from musk, as it is musked, or alcelita before the hernia treatment or bloodletting, so that the main members are comforted and the blood is subtilized; and do not take that cold.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	But the hernias that are not scraped should be hernias that are placed on top of the liver, and over the melsa and podagra, and over the umbilical area, in the places of the joints, and the pith of the finger, because these members do not suffer from scraping.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And it is not needed for those except to attract blood from a member, as well as placing a hernia on the breast in a blood flow malady of blood from the nose; and one should use that so that a thick hernia is dissolved by heat within the member, as well as placing it over the belly and umbilical area, because that will strengthen the member and ease the pain caused by the hernia.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And it is also placed over the knees when they are affected by pain or swelling; because of the strength of its attraction, their hernia will be eased and removed from its place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And similarly, when it is placed over the liver and spleen, one must have a hernia in those who are enclosed.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	And these hernias are administered dry with only suction; and some are administered with fire.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And some are administered full of lukewarm water in illnesses of the spleen.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And this is why the hernia should be filled and large, so it is water alone or water in which herbs are steeped to make it convenient.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Form of hernia administered with fire: the opening should be two digits in width, according to how we have formed it; and the amount of the cup should be a palm in length; and in its width, in the place where it is in the circuit, let it be a palm in width, the hole should be small according to the amount that enters into it, like an aglet.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	It is made of ramie, or citre, with thick edges, of lion, and dogwood and terse, so that it does not stick to the member, it should be placed above the member.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And there is a crosswise bar of ramie or iron, where a candle is placed with fire.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And this hernia should be greater than the one we have recommended before, and the small one according to illnesses and the condition of the person who uses it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And hernias for children and exhausted people are different from those for young people and thick-bodied people.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the quality of placing this hernia with fire over the member is that one extends the mace with fire of decently-sized wood in front of a small candle of wax, and place it over the middle of the crosswise bar in the middle place of the hernia, so that the fire be lit around the bottom so that the body of the patient is not burned.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And then it is placed over the member of the patient, and the finger is placed over the hole that we have said, in between when one holds the hernia and does not press on the finger and causes the vapor to go over that hole, then the hernia will be dissolved right away.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And then light the candle according to its custom, and repeat that if it is requested of you.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	But in a ventouse that is administered for the malady of pleurisy, with water, in which there is no transverse vein or pulse, and it is not administered unless it is filled with water, and it is placed on the member only.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is the shape of it: And this ventouse, the larger it is, the better, so that it can receive a great quantity of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Chapter 97.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Leechdoms are not administered on small members unless ventouses can be placed on them, because of their smallness, as well as on the tongue and gums and similar places; or on a naked limb, as on the finger and nose and similar places.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those leeches that you find in the murky waters of clean rivers.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And they are left in the water for a day and a night, until they become hungry, and no cause remains in their bellies; and the body is evacuated at the beginning by phlebotomy and ventouses; and the member of the patient is rubbed until it turns red; and they are then placed on him.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are full, they are removed.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if it is possible to suck the place with a ventouse, it is better done in this way.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	And if not, then wash the place with agreeable wine and then with cold water; and it is rubbed and pressed.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the body is prolonged in bleeding, and it is sweating, then you dip a cloth into cold water and place it over so that the sweat is absorbed.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the blood is profuse, then powdered vitriol or eggshells and similar things from the group of styptics are sprinkled on it so that the blood is stopped; or cooked fava beans are placed on the spot and left until the favas adhere to the spot, and then the blood is stopped.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And if it is necessary, the iteration of leeches, when they can be changed.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if the leeches are prohibited from suspension, then the spot is rubbed with fresh blood or a needle is placed in the spots where blood oozes, and they are then placed on it, for those as soon as they feel some blood.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want them to close up, sprinkle on them a little ground aloe or salt or ash, and then immediately.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Thus begins the treatment of the third part: of restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is many times necessary in the art of medicine; and it is the restoration of fracture and accidental dislocation in the bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh son, know that the foolish doctors and the common people and those who for any length of time did not read the books of the Ancients nor understood a letter of them.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this cause it has happened that this manner of the scientists in our land is neglected; and I have not practiced it at any time on account of all; and I have not employed what I learned, except through length of reading the books of the Ancients and study about their understanding, so as to extract the science from them.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And I have added experience and study in the length of my life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have already described in this chapter all that my science and over the length of my experience tells me; since I have abreviated it for you others and freed you from occupation with lengthiness; and I have abreviated it at the end of abridgment; and demonstrated it at the end of demonstration; and formed in it many forms of the instruments which are administered in it, as is done through addition of demonstration, so also have I done in two preceding chapters.
Capitol primier.	First chapter.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Summary and collections from being fractured bones, from which their premise is necessary, before we begin the treatment of broken members and diverse if any.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	So let us begin at the beginning of this chapter the summaries of speech; and the chapters to the understanding of which in the beginning are necessary the artificers and at station upon the truth of them; you are and those who are prompt to learn this noble art from you.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And therefore I say that when accidents happen to anyone fracture or dislocation or twisting or herniation, then you must in the beginning with phlebotomy or poultice on him, or any embrocation, if no counter-indication from any cause; or is it to one who has happened debility of strength, or is it to whom it has happened fainting, or is a time of violent heat, or violent rubbing.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And let him be fed with food of herbs fresh and of birds' flesh and of crabs; and prohibited thick flesh and to fill up on food and on all food that fills the veins with blood, so as to guard against pustule cautery, and if you do not fear effusion of material from the member.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And then return the patient to his first regimen with which he was accustomed.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And therefore when the bone begins to be restored, then let the patient be fed with nourishing foods of food thick and heavy in which there is stickiness, as well as foods made from wheat cooked in water, and rice, and peas, and fish, and bellies of cattle, and hogs, and fresh pigs, and wine thick and similar to those; and by this regimen coagulation of fracture is made more quickly and better.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And know that fractured bones when they are in the old and in the decrepit, it is not possible that they are continued and are consolidated according to their nature by the drying of their members.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they are consolidated and continued according to their nature all the time by the drying of those members, and they are continued and consolidated which they are from them in the end of柔軟, as well as the bones of little children.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	But nature adjusts and makes a knot on the fractured bone of all parts any cause similar to glue in which there is thickness that adheres and strengthens it all together, so that it comes to an end of strength and of firmness, as well as fire in the beginning, so that no counter-indication from any cause prohibits it from its works.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this cause it is necessary that you withhold the patient's food, food in which there is heaviness and stickiness and thickness, as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	Diversity of fracture according to diversity of the member.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And know that the kinds of fracture are diverse according to the diversity of the members, for the fracture of the bone of the thigh is diverse from the fracture of the bone of the head; and the fracture of the bone of the foot is diverse from the fracture of the bone of the toe; and similarly all the other members are diverse among them.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And I have written about every kind of fracture, explained in its own chapter distinct from another.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	Diversity of fracture in itself.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And the kinds of fracture of bone in themselves are diverse; for there is made arcuate fracture others that happen in them stars; and some times there is made fracture according to the length of the bone: and they are fractures of the satagia and asthel and addition which proceed and do not proceed, as well as it happens in the pen when it is prepared for writing, and there is fracture with crack and disruption in the head, and there is fissure fracture small.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And all species have their own pain or torture in their restoration according to what will come to the recollection of them distinctly in their places.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	There is a sign for fracture of the bone.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And by this is a fracture of the bone known: it is its crookedness and appearance to the sense, and feel of it when you press on it with your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And therefore when there is no crookedness apparent in the place nor anything done because of your touching when you move the bone and the patient feels no great pain then there is not here a fracture.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	It is possible that there be crookedness or slight fissure, then it does not behoove you to press on it with your hand and with compression altogether; rather pause over it medicines of which come recollection properly to the place; and let it be bound tightly with a subtle ligature.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And know that the place when it is arched and not split in two or anything else that does not happen in it satiation, as is rememered all separated from its kind, then it behooves you to begin from your hour at rectification of it lest what happens in it be cautery.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if what happens in it is cautery, then let it be that for some days until the cautery ceases; and let the wound heal according to whatever way you can of elevation and painlessness.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And know that restoration of it and piercing of it is more difficult than of the bone in which occurs satiation.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And let it be bound according to what will come to the recollection of it.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	But if in the bone there is satiation, then is necessary extension of that broken member from two parts, if it is the hand or the foot; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two strings or one string and the hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And let your position be such that you pause the member's location according to its natural figure, while the parts are extended from the broken member, then it behoves you to make those accessories return with painlessness and according to whatever way you can in their places.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And guard yourself according to your strength that no pain nor injury happens to the patient through your operation; and see to it according to your power that you apply one bone to its fellow's company according to their best forms.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And it behooves you in that hour profitably to touch with your hand that, and if you see here any diverse cause, rectify it and heal it according to the quantity of your skill.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And shun violent extension and compression, likewise as do foolish doctors who many times cause cautery to happen through their operation, or cause contraction in the member likewise as we have seen this through the operation of their many times.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And let there be connection, equiting and decent operation and binding of that member, and rest and tranquillity; admonish the patient about this and make him avoid that he not hurt himself in the hour of his vigils and sleeping, and watch his revolution and movement, and attend to his excretion, and attend to all his movements with all your skill; and know that the position of the member be a position by which there is security from pain, whose cause is when one feels in the disposition of the position of the member pain or injury; then it behoves you to change that to another disposition by which he does not feel pain; and guard about this that the position of it be direct and equitably, so that no crookedness happen to the member when it is healed.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of the binding of the broken member is that which you consider best; for you to know that broken members are diversified in their smallness and in their bigness and in the forms of those.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And of those that are small likewise as the arm and the finger and the elbow and similar to these, then let the wrapping be of very thin cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	But those that are big likewise as the thigh or the leg, then let there be wrapping of tough cloth, for the tough binding connects the large member and binds it tightly all around, so that no crookedness enter it.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And let there be commencement, then your evacuation of equiting, pause the binding convenient to that, over the place of that fracture with three or four wrappings according to what the member merits; and strengthen your hand a little with the binding.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And let there be coming to that at the beginning most superior part of the place of the fracture, and strengthen mind that your binding by which you have strengthened the place of the fracture not loosen.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	And let there be lengthening by you of the wrapping of the place of the fracture a little, and soften the binding a little at a time, while you take from the place its great part.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	And let there be taking another bandage and wrapping that other part over the broken place, and let there be your operation in the binding and in softening of that likewise as we said in the first wrapping above.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And let there be pausing between the bandages of stopa or cloth by which the crookedness of the fracture is equitably bound, if in it is crookedness; but if not, then pause in it no cause.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And let there be pausing over it another bandage, and let there be equiting over these bandages decently made stockings at once, if in the place is no inflammation or cautery, then pause over it that which seats the cautery and which causes the inflammation; and let it be that for some days; and then you strengthen over it the stockings.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And let the stockings be of the measure of thin cane rod, and be formed wisely; or they be of wood of pine; or of rams' penis; and let the width of each stocking according to this form and this figure:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However let the stocking that is paused over that fracture be thicker and tougher a little than the other stockings, and the length of the stocking according to how long it is from the fracture in bigness and smallness; and let there be strengthening over the stockings with another bandage according to your first binding; and let there be tying over it decently with thread according to what we said about binding, and let the binding be according to the place of the fracture less, and how much less is the length from the fracture.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And let the threads be middling in thickness and thinness, and they be of pliant thread; and if the threads are thick, likewise as we have seen by the operation of some foolish pausing their threads of rope threads, and it is great error when the binding is not equitably.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And very thin threads are not convenient, for you will not accomplish by them that which you want through binding, and it behooves that between stocking and stocking there be mind of a finger's breadth.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient is pricked by the ends of the stockings then let there be pausing under those of stopa or woolen cloth until it does not cause him injury.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Some times fracture is with plague, and happens disruption in the sinew, and we come to recollection in that in the head according to singleness.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And know that not every broken member is bound with stockings on the first day; and the cause of this is because the member, when it is large, it behooves that you pause over it stockings only after a few days or more, according to your security about coming of cautery.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	And this is the way of the plasterers by which the Ancients used to heal, they which are paused over fracture and dislocation and wrenching.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Method of emplastrum as a remedy for fractures, suitable for many complexities and especially for women and children, because it is about what does not come heat or friction: and you take from the dust of the mill, and it is the medulla of the flour that passes through the movement of the mill on the walls of the mill.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And cook it as it is, but strain it through a sieve into an egg white, and use the thick or thin consistence as appropriate; then use it as needed.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another manner of healing ointment for broken bones and dislocation and twisting: take from assafetida, from myrrh, from acacia, from enula, and from mace, which is the juice of wild pomegranate, of all an ounce each; of myrrh and aloe, of each a drachm five; of aloes, twenty; all these shall be strained and sifted and mixed with honey water or with egg albumen if the patient's constitution is hot; and then use this ointment, for it is of good composition and restores quickly broken bones, and confers to many men.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another manner of ointment which confers to broken bones and twisting: take mace, and put of white poplar an ounce each; of myrrh and aloe, of each a drachm five; of acacia six drachms; all mixed with honey water or egg albumen, and then make a good ointment.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All are ground in a mortar with a little moisture, and strained, and cooked with water or egg white, and administered.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Method of emplastrum for joints and bones separated from their places, and pain caused in them, and to fissures and fractures: take soft wool and submerge it in sweet wine and cut oil, and place it on the affected area.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	Let this emplastrum not be used to restore strength, but to cauterize and expel pain properly.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another method of emplastrum that heals broken bones: take leaves from a fig tree and leaves from wild poppies; pound all together and make an emplastrum from them.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida .i.; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Method of emplastrum administered for the restoration of broken bones and when you want resolution of the remaining of an abscess: take pounded marsh mallow, chamomile, and violet flowers, and flour of bran, all together in one part .I. Let all be ground and cooked in wine, if the affected member is not wounded.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	But if it is wounded, then cook it with water of coriander or with water and use it.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another method of emplastrum which is stronger in resolution than the previous one, when an abscess happens due to the restoration of a member: take pounded marsh mallow and sesame seeds, and ballota, and marjoram, violet flowers, chamomile, all together in one part i unground; let all be ground and cooked with water of celery or with warm water or wine, according to the quality of the affected member and its rest of color.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	But ipocras doesn't dry in its own free that it is placed on the broken member due to its restoration but wax made of wax and oil and no other cause; and return that it is between thickness and thinness.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	But it is seen that they are placed on the broken member due to its restoration and the causes in which there is dryness with little heat are also like those causes that we have recounted.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	Method of emplastrum that provides to injury and pain: take mace, cesium, human hair or bird feather, marsh mallow, and salt, all unground; let all be ground and strained and cooked, and make an emplastrum from it.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	But the amount according to the quality that covers the bandage and then it is loosened, consider if there is no pain nor swelling, nor the bone is broken not moved from its place, then you do not displace for many days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if it happens to the affected area violent pain or swelling or inflammation, then you cut or loosen it at the hour and remove the emplastrum from it.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	And take a band of linen and marine sponge wet with warm water, and soak the affected area in tepid water, and wash it with that until the swelling and pain are reduced; then let it rest for an hour; then place on it soft wool soaked in sweet wine and oil or rose oil, and bind it up for one night within which you are sure of the abscess cauterized, and the inflammation of the member is soothed, and the pain of it.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then repeat that gentle compression and little binding, and not tighten it by your first tightening, and apply that until it is healed.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if the abscess and rogor and pain and inflammation and all the accidents are now reduced to all, and you have stopped using emplastrum and compression, then repeat that as you did at the beginning equally.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o .vii.; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if there is not any cause to the member of those that we have mentioned, then do not loosen it but after three days or four or five or seven. And some time all that is left for twenty days according to how you appear by the loosening of the bandage, as we have said, until the fracture heals, and approaches the coagulation of the flesh on it.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And then tighten the compression but not as in your first compression all together, and adjust in the swelling of the member, according to how it is preceded by its memory.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	But if you see the fracture is already dried and wasted but not closed, then know that food is prohibited to reach it; and then soak it with tepid water due to total exhaustion that of the member; and let it be for three days; loosen the compression a little, and by this operation food reaches the member, and it is healed lightly.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	But that which is done by the false restorators of the member's fracture due to its not being restored at the beginning, according to how it covers and is restored according to tortuosity, is error according to their operation, and great fear, and if they were stretched in their free parts and turned am on them.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And I have not seen any of them doing that, because it is more reasonable that it does not happen.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Chapter according to: Of fracture when it happens in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The kinds of fractures are many, and their shapes are diverse, and the causes are distinct, for any fracture is not done by the impact of a staff, and the impact stands all the bone within the skull, which is under the skull, as it happens in the foot, and by this that kind of fracture is named ascial; or the staff penetrates a part of the bone, and penetrates the flesh of it and does not go through the interior of it; and this kind of fracture is named absolute elevation.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the split of those two fractures or is great or small, and the fracture that is compression or atraction; and cause of it is impact by a stone or falling on stone, and to them similar.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture is penetrating that it approaches the membrane which is under the bone; or it is in the face of the bone, and the split of these two fractures or is great or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And in a fracture it is removed from the bone, in the subtlety of the hair's smallness, and because of this it is named this kind of capillary fracture.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And it is a fracture that is done by either chipping or stone percussion and their likes, causing some lamella of the bone to enter the cavities inside, and it is done in the concave place just as it happens to fingers when they are hit with a rock and there is an entrance made into the cavities within them.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	And mostly this happens to the bodies of hollow bones, just like in baby skulls.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And for all these species of fractured sutures, they are separated as if with stars.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And then I will have the memory of all this in my place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And I know all these species of fracture by detection on those, and by inquiry of their feeling and appearance of rotten flesh that is upon them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And capillary fracture is known by that being uncovered on the bone and being cleaned, and being stung over it, for then the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	But in the cure of fracture consider at the beginning the accidents of the patient, and then if you see by the accidents that signify by manifest signification for fear, as with vomiting of cholera, and extension, and loss of understanding, and absence of speech, and syncope, and acute fever, and sweat of those, and redness on them, and similar to them in the major dispositions, it is not healed.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if you see accidents not occurring you hope for health then you begin the cure of it.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	The reason for which is that if it has come to you the sick person in the beginning as it was sick and that is on the day twelve according to all disposition, then cover that you study in the appearance of the bone against the day fourteen.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is in the days of summer then cover that you cut the bone against the seventh day having that which is below the bone be rotten by the membrane and that the accidents we have counted happen.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already come to the membrane covering the brain and it is with small pieces and crushed then cover that you insert the crushed and ground piece according to what I will tell you.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And it is that you scrape the head of the sick person and uncover upon the bone according to habit and manner to you possible according to the figure of the plague and that it be lighter on the sick person.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if it happens to you that you must make the detection of the bone and bleeding of pus or cauterization then you stop it with what covers, and you moisten the place with bandages infused in wine and rose oil and let the plague rest while the pustule is settled and blood stopped; and then proceed to the incision of the bone and removing it.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And that be according to one of two manners of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And one manner is that you insert the bone with a narrow incision knife and this is its shape: And then administer another incision knife this one a little wider than that; and this is its shape:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And then administer even more the incision knife wider than the second.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And have that it be ought to you number of incision knives various, of which some are wider than others; and some of them are shorter than the rest and are in the thickness of their sharpness, and they are of iron or steel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use them with facility upon the incision knife so that it does not cut into the head and lead that one.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is strong and hard then cover that you pierce into its circuit before administering the incision knives with awls which are called non-deep awls.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And they are not named thus but because those do not pass the end of the bone but the awl is round or rounded on its edge and below the head of it looks like margin or small circle, which forbids being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	And it is convenient that you take of those awls great number of which each one suits the thickness of each bone, within that it be to you present in all skulls the extremity of which is acute, the quantity in length and brevity according to the quantity of thickness of this skull.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	And this is the form of three species of awls: The quality of boring into the circuit of the broken bone is that you pause the awl on the bone and rotate it with your fingers within that you know that the bone is already penetrated; and then change the awl to another location, and pause what is between every hole the quantity of thickness of the thread or wrap around that.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And then insert with incision knives what is between each crack of the bone and do that more subtle than you can on its end in fineness, as we have said, within that you erradicate the bone or with your hand or with some other cause by any tools which you will have apparatus for, as tongs and forceps subtle.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And have that you keep with all precaution that the incision knife does not touch any nerve of the brain.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And then when you have bored around the bone and separated it from the brain if it is continued with it, and have that extracted, cover that you scrape and gnaw it in its roughness of what is in the bone with another instrument similar to an incision knife but indeed let it be thicker and more subtle than the other incision knives.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if you break any of the small bones and sutures then take that with facility by what is ought to you from the tools, and then cure the plague with poultices and ointments which we have said.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the other manner of operation is lighter, distant from fear, which is said Gualia and is broken by great force; and this is its speech: it is necessary to you in the beginning that you begin to uncover the crack of the bone of the place in which there is the fracture most violent and most manifest, within that when you have uncovered that crack and you will have paused below it the extremity of this incision knife lente and gentle of which this is the shape:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And the lenticular crack is lion and does not insert any cause, and the acute crack is of it in two sides forward in length as you see; that the lenticular crack be attached to the brain by the membrane of it cutting into the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And then pierce over the incision of one crack with a small hammer within that you insert all the bone with facility as it is turned and you be sure of the membrane that no accident happens in any manner which you fear in any way, and if the patient was the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly, and if he was sleeping.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	And then if it breaks any cause attached to the bone of the membrane in some place of bones, insert that of it with the extremity of the incision knife lenticular and deliver that of it with facility for it is delivered from it its harm and its fear.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate within the membrane and what is broken or remained of the bone is the membrane of it and you break into it and gnaw its roughness and sutures subtle, then cover that you scrape that roughness and erradicate those sutures with razors subtle by which you have prepared the number, of various quantities so that be to you possible administering them in every place most convenient of them and most proper of them according to what you are led in your operation that broken bone and the figure of it.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And whoever you administer to in your care, with which tools you extract the bones at the start of those wounds, and then use that tool on the pus beneath them, and do not stop doing this until you have extracted all the pus and the subtler humors from all these places.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	But in any of the other small broken capillaries and subtle fractures, whoever you are treating should be cured according to what is lost in order to rectify it.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And it is a cause that has not been revealed above all those who have studied that art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And now about what we have written, we will show in great fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the skin is stretched when you remove the bone, then take a piece of cloth according to the quantity of the wound and soak it in rose oil and place it over the hole of the wound; and then take another cloth folded or doubled and soak it in wine and rose oil and place it over the first cloth and do this gently so that you don't harm the nerve; and then administer on that a liniment, and don't tighten it except for the quantity of the wound.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And leave him with this treatment for a day or two until you are sure of cauterization; and then remove it and administer medicines that get rid of superfluous moisture, such as lint and barley flour, and powder of onions and of aristology, and of similar things to these.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And it is that you make of these medicines a powder that can be sprinkled over the wound as they are dried; and generally, administer to him all medicine of which its property is that it cleanses and doesn't bite.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And take care according to your virtue that the wound in your curing is clean; and let there be no surdity of ointment or other thing in it; nor let virulence gather in it; for when it is applied on the membrane of the brain, it corrupts it and causes evil in the patient.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And it occurs in the membrane of the head when the bone is removed and especially when the cure of it is neglected, and there is blackness on its surface; and therefore if these accidents occur in the patient, know that he has six diseases.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas .iii., e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if blackness does not occur except from the medicine that is applied to it and it is in the virtue of that medicine that makes that blackness, then take a portion of honey and of rose oil [portions] iii. and with those lines a cloth, and then place it over the membrane; and then cure that with spices of cure that are suitable until he is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter iii.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	Of restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	Know that the nose is not broken except in two places, some more prominent than others, or one of those bent slightly, because there are two bones in it, for the lower part is cartilaginous and not broken, and nothing happens to it except curvature and tortuosity and sinusitis.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	But if one of the two places is broken, then you should insert your little finger into his nose and grip that fracture inside with your index finger and push it outward with your thumb until the nose returns to its natural shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And let this be done by you easily, and take care that he does not cry out from that operation on the patient.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is on the most prominent part of the nose and the finger cannot reach it, then let it be straightened with the tip of the needle in which there is a small thickness.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is on two places, then you should do that similarly.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And let him be restored on the first day of the fracture if it is possible; and if not, then let him rest for the cauterization of the wound for seven or nine days.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And then insert into the tip of the nose a piece of cloth if there is one fracture, or two splints if there are two fractures, and let the splint have enough thickness to fill up the gap in the nose.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And some of the ancient restorers say that the splints should be wrapped in a cloth, and changed every day, but I have not seen this; others say that the cloth should be wrapped in a ball of honey comb with powder of moly; and then let it stay until the bone is set and the cartilage is hardened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And in some cases, let the bone of the nose be inserted instead of splints, a feather of the peacock more robust that is wrapped in cloth of lion; and let it stay until the fracture of the nose is more violent and that the patient is not prohibited from breathing.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	And this cause is not necessary for you; and if you want to do it, then do it, and if you want to make splints, then make them.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if another cauterization occurs on the nose, plaster it with ceratum or cotton soaked in wine and rose oil, or with diaquilinum.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	But if there is no cauterization on the nose, then let you plaster it outward with sesame flour and powder of onions cooked in honey; and then place over it a sponge of lion's wool, and do not press the nose for any reason.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	But if the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or are crushed, then split them and remove them with tools that are suitable for those; and then sew up the cut, and cure it with what encapsulates and consolidates, and plaster it in whatever is convenient.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	And if there is a wound inside the nose, then let you cure that with splints and administer lead tubes until it is completely healed.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter iv.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	Of restoration of the jaw when it is broken.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jaw is broken and there is no wound on it, observe then if the fracture is outward only and not broken in two parts and bent inwards, then its understanding is easier.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	And therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, then insert your left index finger into the mouth of the patient; and similarly if the fracture is on the left jaw, then insert your right index finger; and push by that the curvature of the fracture inside with ease to the outward parts by your other hand from the outward part of the bone; by this he will be evenly straightened.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two parts, then let you administer extension of both parts according to its rightness until it is possible for it to be even.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if there is concussion of teeth to disruption, then tighten those from which you expect that they will break with a thread of gold or silver or silk; and then place over the broken jaw ceratum, and then a doubled cloth, and over the cloth a great plate decently made, or a stone of only length of the jaw; and then tie that above according to how it is equipped to you as the application convenes so that it is not destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And command that he have rest and tranquility, and let him drink cooling drinks of lions.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you think that it is altered in some way, then let you bind and loosen it on the third day; and then rectify what is altered of it and plaster it with powder of moly, with honey comb, or with sesame flour, after you have removed the ceratum from it, and place over the plaster lion' s wool.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And then when he is lying still and that plaster is applied to him, and the disposition of the bone is not altered, leave it, so that you do not disturb it until the fracture is healed and strong; for in many ways this fracture is tightened within three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if another blister occurs from a cautery, then administer what we have said many times in the treatment of him until he is healed and that blister is resolved.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is complicated by an infection, then you should carefully examine whether the bone is separated or crushed; then you skillfully remove those crushings with that which is convenient in removing them with instruments.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the opening of the wound is narrow, then you widen it by phlebotomy according to the amount of your need.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	Then when you have removed those crushings and they do not heal, then you clean the opening of the wound if it is large; and if not, place one of those plasters that are convenient for that and let it become embedded until it is healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5:
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	Of the restoration of the collarbone when it is dislocated.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	Many times the collarbone in front is broken by a blow from a muscle, and that fracture occurs in one of three ways:
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	Because it is either broken, or separated, or separated into two parts without the occurrence of blisters; and its restoration is easier; or it occurs with blisters, and its restoration is difficult; or the fracture is complicated by an infection.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And the operation on it, when the fracture is complicated by an infection, is that you have two ministers, so that one has the support and follows the collarbone that is broken, and the other extends the collar under that part.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	Then fasten the fracture with threads so that it is made in the shape of a cone and not have a small eminence or concavity.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if you need more extension, then cover the area under the armpit with a thick pad of cloth or wool, and let its size be according to the amount of your need; and extend and elevate the collarbone and contract the pad with your hand until you fasten the fracture as it should be.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot draw the end of the collarbone to the outward parts because it is reached by the breast, then let the patient be reclined on his chest, and place a cushion over his shoulder, with a half-cushion in size, under the muscle of the collarbone.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the minister presses the muscle of it to the outward parts below so that the collarbone bone is elevated from above, and then you correct the fracture and fasten it with threads.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	But if you feel blisters on the collarbone and they are not resolved, then let them be lanced and those blisters extracted with ease.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is retained in the bone, then you devise an incision of it with one of the incisers which you have prepared for that purpose, after you have placed below the collarbone the instrument that serves as the head; and it is an instrument of wood or iron, and this is its form:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And it is like a chisel of which this is the concavity; and let its breadth be according to what you need of it, according to the size of the bone or its thinness.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	But its length be according to what is possible for you in the operation; and let it have two ends just as before, and one end be broad and the other narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the opening of the wound which you have lanced when you have extracted the blister from the bone is large and it is certain that there will be a blister from cauterization, then you adjust the two lips of the wound with a suture.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the opening is small, or you fear a blister from cauterization, then you fill the wound with cloths and powders according to the amount of the opening of the wound.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if a blister from cauterization occurs, then soak a cloth in warm vinegar and rose oil and place it over that.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	But the constriction of the bone when it is without a wound and without an incision, is that you place a plaster made from flour of wheat with white of egg, and place over it a piece of linen, and then place a cloth under the armpit, if it needs it; and then take an ointment, so called the one which the Saracens have, which is very long, and let its breadth be of one palm or around that; and then put powders doubled over the piece of linen and the plaster; and then take a wooden stake that is thin, and whose breadth is three fingers, and its length similar; and then wrap that in cloth, and wrap that cloth with the stake at the place over the fracture; and then take ointment so as it is poured out, and roll that over his neck and under the armpit of his arm, and reduce that upon all parts, and when you see that the constriction of the fracture with constriction descends, and this is what does not occur to you.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And altogether, let the stake not be resolved over the broken bone; and therefore you see the patient every day, that when the ligament becomes soft or you see the stake already resolved, then you correct it and make the fastening strong.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And then place the patient's head upon his arm, and let there be placed under the armpit of him a little cushion; so that with that is elevated the support of it from the side of that, and therefore is elevated the fracture of the collarbone to elevation of the muscle; or let the arm be bound to the neck of him.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not remove the ligament unless blisters occur in the place definitely, or within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And then renew the plaster when you have seen its face to that, and adjust in constriction and restore it and leave it until it is restored and the fracture of the collarbone is coagulated.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it is strengthened and comforted according to the moon in 28 days, and in some men it is made within a month of that time.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter 6:
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the shoulder.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The spatula is broken in the wide place of it and not broken from it except its margins.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And then when it is broken at the place of it — and it is broken in the middle place of it — and is not congealed except by contact, then according to the figure of the fracture you have the preparation of it and reduce that according to the natural figure in every way of engine which is possible for you.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	And then place over the place powder of wheat with white of egg and piece of linen; and then place doubled cloth; and then place over it a wooden stake that is thin according to the quantity of the spatula all or perhaps a little.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	But if under the stake is a concavity in any of the places of the spatula, then you fasten that concavity with piece of linen, and then place the stake according to equality.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And then strengthen above it with long ointment with decent constriction and with firmness of the stake so that it is not resolved in its place.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And consider the ligament every day; and whenever it becomes soft, ligate another time and tighten it and equalize the stake if it is resolved in its place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And hold the patient upon his own side.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	And the spatulate is restored in 20 days or less.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And when this number is complete, then you should dissolve the ligament; and know that it belongs to the bones from which the beginning is not feared nor their dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you proceed from the place of the bone to the bottom of the cord, then you should split it, and ostiate it, and do according as we have said in the fracture of the collarbone of suppuration of pus if it happens here.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter .vii.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	On the restoration of the fracture of the foot.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The foot sometimes is broken in one place and there is no pain therefrom; but the extremities of it are sore, and the bones are crushed and splintered.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And of its accidents when the middle of it is broken there ensues a decline to the parts within and there befalls it great pain, and difficulty in walking, and cough, and strong vomiting of blood; and a cavity is manifested in the broken bone and is not concealed from sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And the restoration of it is that the patient should be reclined upon his back, and place under him a cushion; and press against the muscles of him, and adjust the ribs of him with the hands of two men, and keep him in the operation of it and in the setting according to every possible way that he convenes to it, until he returns the shape of the bone according as it was.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	And then place upon him plaster and felt, and place over it a bed of subtle sawdust or of ashes, or of things like them in lightness, after you have enveloped that in cloth; and then carefully apply that against the broken bone lest it be hurt; and go with ligature according to roundness to the back sometimes, and strengthen that with decent tightness; and consider the ligature at every hour, and when it is softened strengthen that.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	And if necessity requires the removal of that you must cut off that or press upon it, or pain, or suppuration that befalls it in the place, then you should cut and unbind that and eradicate the plaster and rectify that which befalls by way of cure of it; and then return the plaster, when you see is fit for it; and adjust the tightness on him until he is healed.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter .viii.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	On the restoration of the ribs when they are splintered.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	Know that fracture of the ribs does not occur except in gross places that follow the back; and from the ends of them to the front there befalls to those no constriction except by reason that they are cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And cognition of it is not concealed from sensation you must make inquiry of it with the fingers.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration is that you should close the fracture with the fingers according to possible manner, until it is healed according as it was, and then plaster and strengthen the broken bone with splints, if he needs them.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And if the fracture of the ribs is declining to the parts within then there befalls to the patient violent pain and piercing, just as piercing that befalls that which has been punctured, and by reason of that the bone thrusts upon the membrane; and there befalls to him difficulty in breathing, and cough, and vomiting of much blood; and this is of difficult cure.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And now the antiseptics are applied to it with warm poultices.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And of them I say this: let him abstain from foods that engender inflammation and windiness, so that the belly may be swollen and extended, and the fracture be driven to the parts without.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	But we would abstain from it lest it be the cause of suppuration to generate cautery, if not happen; and if it does happen then it would help.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And some of them say that it should be laid upon with fomentation and then drawn with strength; and this is like ratiocination, but indeed it is feared that the fomentation would drive out the superfluities to the place by reason of weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	And some of them say: let the place be covered with wool that has been dipped in hot oil, and let there be laid in between the ribs a poultice which is moistened, so that the ligature is wrapped around it according to roundness; and then let the patient be cured by cure of pleurisy of food and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if it causes violent constriction that he does not endure, and the bone thrusts upon the membrane with piercing pain, then fear about the patient; therefore let him be cut over the place, uncovered of the splintered rib, and then let there be placed over it an instrument that conserves the ciphac, the memory of which precedes, and that we insert into the bone with ease, and extract that.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And then let us adjust the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with cauterization, and cure that by way of plaster until it is healed.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if suppuration befalls within then you should cut and apply poultices in warm oil, and let it be cured by what covers the suppuration within.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And let him be reclined upon his side upon which he slept until he is healed.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter .ix.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	On the restoration of the fracture of the vertebra of the back and of the neck.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Sometimes fracture befalls to the bones of the neck, and it extends to their articulations, and likewise to the vertebrae of the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And if it befalls to anyone and you wish to know whether he will be healed or not, then consider, for if you see the fingers are already swollen and stupefied and dead and cannot move those nor extend nor tighten them, and when you pinch those with your fingers or stab those with a needle and he does not feel pain in those, then know that he is not healed, and in months of disposition it is mortal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if you constrict those with the fingers and stab those with a needle and he feels pain in those, then know that the marrow of the bone is saved, and that the patient will be cured by cure.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you see the vertebrae of the neck like that and wish to know whether he will be healed or not, then consider his feet.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	Now if you see that they are already swollen, suppuration befalls to them like that which befell the fingers, and then when he lies upon his back he experiences windiness and loss of his will, and sometimes is reclined over his back and wants to urinate and cannot, then know that it is mortal, and therefore you must not work in the cure of him.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	But if none of those befalls to them, then the cause is better and likewise less painful.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And the cure of him is that you pierce to the suppuration of the cautery that rests upon the splintered vertebra with oil which is warmed, or with balls of hempseed which are scorched; place over it sometimes during the day while the suppuration is settled.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And then place one of the poultices that are comforting and hot, and strengthen over it with ligature; and command the patient to take rest and tranquility, and not sleep upon the part from which he experiences pain until he is healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if suppuration befalls by reason of the articulation of the bone or any cause that is already separated from him, then cut over it and let that bone dry; and then adjust the two lips of the wound with suturing if it is large; and cure that by way of poultice of the intestines, until it is healed.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	But if the lowest of the vertebrae is splintered and it is the end of the spine, then let you insert the tip of the middle finger of the left hand into the anus, and close the splintered bone with the right hand according as it is possible by second position; and then place over it plaster and splints if they need that, and then strengthen that.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel broken bones in him, then you will put a splint on it, and fix it, and heal the wound with the medicine that is preceded so that it may be healed.
Capitol .x.	Here is the translation of the provided text:
De restauracio de la ancha.	Here is the translation:
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	Here is the translation:
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	Here is the translation:
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	Here is the translation:
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	Here is the translation:
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	Here is the translation:
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	Here is the translation:
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	Here is the translation:
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	Here is the translation:
Capitol .xi.	Here is the translation:
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	Here is the translation:
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	Here is the translation:
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	Here is the translation:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	Here is the translation:
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	Here is the translation:
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	Here is the translation:
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	Here is the translation:
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	Here is the translation:
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	Here is the translation:
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	Here is the translation:
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Here is the translation:
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	Here is the translation:
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	Here is the translation:
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	Here is the translation:
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	Here is the translation:
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	Here is the translation:
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	Here is the translation:
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	Here is the translation:
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	Here is the translation:
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	Here is the translation:
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	Here is the translation:
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	Here is the translation:
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	Here is the translation:
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	Here is the translation:
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	Here is the translation:
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	Here is the translation:
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	Here is the translation:
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	Here is the translation:
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	On the restoration of fractures of the arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The arm is composed of two bones which are called the two bones of the elbow; one of which is small, and is that which is above the bend of the wrist, and the other is large, and is placed below the small bone, from the part further down.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And usually the larger bone only is broken, or the smaller one, and rarely are they both broken at the same time.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when the smaller bone is broken at the top, then its restoration is more difficult, and its healing is even more so.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when the bone is broken below the elbow, then its fracture is harmful, and its healing is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And worst of all is when both bones are broken at the same time.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore, if the bone that is broken is the smaller one at the top, then it is appropriate for the doctor, in performing its restoration, to apply a small extension with ease while that part is bandaged.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	But if the larger bone is what is broken, then it is fitting that he apply more vigorous extension.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both bones are broken at the same time, then you must apply extension with the greatest force.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And you must make the hand into the shape of a hand when performing its restoration and extension by extending it over a cushion, with the palm of the hand upwards, more than all the others, and let the auricular part be further down than all the others, and let the patient be seated upon a raised pillow.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And let there be a cushion beneath him, in the height or angle of his body, so that he does not move about.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	Then the assistant should extend the arm at the part furthest down with his hand or with a bandage, and another assistant should similarly extend it upwards.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	And the doctor should bandage the bone as he reduces it to the best figure that he can.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if in the setting of the bone there are any knots, then you must reduce all pressure in its place with your strength.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if there appears in it a separated knot that punches through the tendon, and it is not within your power to restore it, then you must work on it and prevent that according to the manner which we have said above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	But if the fracture is compound, I have already spoken about that in this chapter, and so you may take its cure.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if suppuration occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then you should spread a cloth soaked in oil of roses and white wax, made medium between thin and thick, and tightly bound over that suppuration; and then remove the cerate and apply plaster prepared from powder of moly with honey, and then place splints; and let the splint which is placed over that fracture be more layered and stronger.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And know that the number of splints for the arm are seen in the greater dispositions, or whether the fracture is in one bone or both bones together.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	And then apply your binding over the site of the fracture more strongly and more vigorously, and when you loosen the binding at the parts above the fracture or at its lower parts, loosen the binding a little according to how it is remembered in the beginning of this chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the cloths which are wrapped over the fracture should be soft moist cloths, and not hard or rough; and the thread with which it is bound should be of an appropriate middling thickness between thin and thick, as we have recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	And consider the member and the binding after a few days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if there is any cause for which rectification is necessary, then as soon as that happens to the member, then you should immerse the member in warm water until that subsides.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And let the member not be bound while it rests, and then return the binding.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the binding is already loosened and the bone is already set right and similar to those, then you should rectify all that with your strength.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And consider more if the nourishment is prohibited from coming to the member due to excess of binding, then you should loosen that a little and let it remain for a few days so that that comes to that member, and then bind that more strongly.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	But if there is no cause to the patient for those which we have said, then it should not be unbound until after about 20 days or more of those.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And then let the patient's hand be suspended by its strength in an agitated movement, and make him sleep on his back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	And know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or in 32 days, or very seldom in 28 days, and all that is according to the disposition of the complications and the dispositions of nature.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	Of the restoration of the wrist and fingers.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	Know that to the wrist and knuckles of the fingers there often occurs fracture, and not to them but much movement many times.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when it happens that there is a break or tear in the hand, then you should have the patient lean forward and lie down according to his ability, and then place your hand over that extended area.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	Then the assistant should extend the broken bones and the doctor should bind those areas which are appropriate with a good bandage.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And then you should place plaster and padding if there is no abscess, and then put a poultice over it according to the size of the area, and you have already wrapped that in cloth.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	But if the cut is on the sides of the fingers and within the palm, then make a tent with cloth, and instruct the patient to hold that area with his palm which has been cut; then have it bound with long cloth.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And let the poultice of meat be applied to the palm with cloth, and have it bound according to how it should be.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	But if the cut is on the outer parts of the fingers, then you should place poultices over it and another one below in the palm so that the hand can be opened and straightened; and then apply the binding as the hand turns around with the palm facing upwards between the thumb and fingers.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	And if a cut happens to one of the joints on the fingers, then it should be bound according to how it should be and then bound with the palm; and if you want, place a small straight splint so that the fracture is elevated and not bruised.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	But if the cut is on the other fingers, thus it is in the middle finger, or in the index finger, or in the ear finger, or in the ring finger, then it should be bound and tied with that finger which has the cut; or they are all tied according to continuity, and that is better; or place a small splint over it as we have said in the pous.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider in your restoration and then that, the disposition of abscess cauterization and opposition — with your operation — with what occurs when any cause of those happens, according to how it is iterated in his narration.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter .xiv.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	Of the restoration of a fracture of the thigh bone.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The thigh bone is often broken and it is declared to the feeling according to how it turns to the front and to the upper part.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	And its restoration is done in such a way that the bandage is bound over the fracture and another bandage below the fracture, and the patient lies on his back and on his face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	And then the assistant should extend all the bandages to their ends according to quality, when the fracture is in the middle part of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	But if it is near the hip joint, then let the bandage be near the groins at the end of the pubic bone, so that the extension pulls upwards, and let the other bandage be below the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And similarly if the break is near the groin, then let the bandage be made near the groin, and let the extension pull from below.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And then the doctor should bind the bone with both of his hands within in order to reduce it according to its natural appearance and the bone is joined by good conjunction; and then you should place plaster and binding if there is no abscess in the limb.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	But if an abscess happens in it, then let it be left for some days until the abscess has subsided, and then return to your cure.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The binding of it should be done thus: cover the fracture with a hard bandage, and fold that two or three times, and remove from it superfluity; and then wrap the leg so that it comes to the ankle and to the hip joint.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And put in long wool between the thigh and the leg near the groin at the ends below, and let the extremes of the wool come from the highest part of both parts, and then turn around on the leg and the thigh that which is superfluous from the bandage.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And then place splints over the thigh at the site of the fracture, and place one of those splints over the bone of the leg.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	And then fill the emptiness between the leg and the thigh with soft cloths so that the binding is coagulated.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And then begin with strong binding of the middle over the site of the fracture with three or four wrappings, and as you distance yourself from the bandage of the site of the fracture, your binding should be lesser and more loose and more soft.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	And then extend the two extremes of the wool to the ends below so that it comes to the ankle of the foot, and bind both extremes of the splints on the other side so that the bandage is not pulled from its place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And then let the binding be over that, where it is so that no corrosion nor abscess nor inflammation happens to it and its likes; and if any of those happen, then treat him with removal of it, and correct what happens altogether, according to how we have said many times.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	But if in the bone there is an infection of the bone, then you should bind it according to how you are able; and if not, leave it and remove that, and cure with what from which preceded is the reminder so that it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And sometimes this fracture of the thigh is bound by others so that they are fitted to it, thus as we have said in the assistant and in the arms.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	But in the restoration of it so made, let the patient not have a limp; and if it is restored alone, then let the other leg be applied to it, then it is necessary that he limps from which one there is a fracture.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And know that the thigh is bound for 40 days or a few months or a few months, and all that is according to the diversity of the complexities and of the other dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter .xv.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the groin.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	Know that a fracture of the groin starts inside, but it happens to it many times traction.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	But if a fracture happens to it, then it is not anything but crack or tear in its parts, and that is with wound or wounds, and over that all is felt by the sense.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And its restoration is thus that it is bound where it is broken in its parts with the fingers so that it is added and joined according to how it is possible by accommodation and ease and fabrication.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	And then place plaster and place over that a round splint if there are indigent from that; and bind above it with binding as is convenient.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	And then consider all the dispositions which we have commanded in the other fractures, thus as there is abscess cauterization and similar to those in that there is a stop to all accident with what to it is convenient so that it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter .xvi.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the leg.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	Know that in the leg there are two bones of which one is large, and it is named by name of the leg; and the other is slender, and it is named tibia.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And it happens to each of the species of fracture that it happens to both bones of the arm, and for that reason is done restoration of it thus as restoration of the arm is bound, and the operation of it is one.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if are broken two bones together, then the leg is turned to all parts.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if the more slender bone is broken, then the leg turns to the front parts.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	If the bone is cracked, you treat it by bleeding, which is one of those things that are not your business.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	Then administer extension and alignment and liaison of the bones according to the treatment.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	But if the fracture of the leg is open and has many small wounds, then the extension should be lesser and gentler, and you must use your skill.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And if the leg has any cause for operation on the arms, and it is when you treat the bones and complete all your operation, then you will take weights of wood which are placed under the causes that are placed in soles, and they are made from white of palm; you arrange those whose small thickness is small, and there should be no gap between them, and their length according to the length of the leg, and into the deepest part.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	Then wrap around each one in two wraps according to the length of it, and place one at the end of the leg on one side and the other on the other side, and they should be into the deepest part of the bottom of the foot.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	Then tie the two bones in three places with two extremes and at the middle place, for with this tension the leg is prohibited from tilting to the right and left sides, and it stands in good position.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And a brace of wood has been administered according to the length of the leg, and it should be placed on it so that it conserves its movement.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And most importantly, you do this in fracture, and when it is properly healed.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And then consider the leg every day and study it with that previous study, and you must guard it from abscess and inflammation or similar causes; and when any of those causes occur, then apply to it what is necessary so that it becomes healthy.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter .xvii.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	Of the fracture of the ankle and the bones of the foot and the toes.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	The ankle does not usually fracture completely; but the bones of the foot fracture sometimes; and few toes of the foot fracture, and they do not fracture unless there is attrition in the places of disposition.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if the bones of the foot are fractured and those bones happen to be elevated upon each other, then the patient should put his foot on the ground prepared in this way.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	Then place one foot on that which is elevated of those bones, and then press and heal those within so that they return to their places.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	Then apply plaster and a plug on top of it, and place under the belly of the foot a small table to which are two pegs.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	Then strengthen that with the foot with decent tension, because you have wrapped it with drapes and other things from which you are not able to get away.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And when three or four days have passed, then you loosen the ligament, for you will find the bones healed, or cracked, or dislocated, and the operation in those is just as you know it to be.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	But if any toes are cracked, then restore those, and heal those just as you and your opinion are accustomed to in the restoration of the toes of the hand.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	Then place a splint on the cracked toe according to the length of the toe, and let there be more of it; and under the foot this table which is recommended to you, and strengthen that with decent tension.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	But if that which is cracked of the bones is two or three or more, then you place on each toe a splint of its quantity wrapped in lion drape, and strengthen the table under the bottom of the foot, and let it stand on one of the pegs of the table so that it has good retention.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is convenient for you not to forget that you do not consider all the causes which are told to you in other fractures of the accidents that we have said; and apply to every accident what is necessary.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter .xviii.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	Of the fracture of the groin and the bone of the hip and the rod of man.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the groin of the femur is fractured, then make that fall into the hollow, and then incline that to the side at the top a little, and let it be held behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And then the midwife fills the crotch with cotton, and let it be done in the crotch just as sperma; and then the femur is concussed, and elevated at the top little by little, for all that is forgotten within so that it becomes before the crotch just as sperma and the bone cracked returns.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And then sprinkle powder over the top of it, and when he wants to urinate, let him hold the crotch with facility and then urinate, and reduce and return that according to the manner according to which you measured it at the beginning, and then return to its first powder.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And do this for seven days or around those, for it is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you want, take an ovela bladder and strengthen over the hole of it a straw of reed; and insert the whole bladder into the crotch of it, and then insufflate through the straw with strength so that the bladder is inflated inside the crotch, for the fracture returns.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And then let it be filled with sperma and stand for some days according to what we have recommended, so that it becomes healthy.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the bone of the hip of man or woman is cracked, then administer in its restoration and healing what we have recommended in the bone of the hip.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And that which is right is not hidden in these nearby fractures and which hardly happens, mostly to him to whom there is some study and use and understand my free will; for that fracture indicates to you in the greatest dispositions directly in the restoration and in the tension of it, and therefore understand well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	But in the rod of man when it is cracked, take the skin of a horse, and put the rod into that; and then apply over it wrap of drape, and let it be wrapped, and then let it be left for three days or around those, and let it become healthy.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter .xix.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	Of the restoration of the bones when they are with plague.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient for him to whom fracture happens with plague, and especially if the bone is large just as it is the bone of the head or of the helper, or similar to that, that you take care and fleubotomies that just as the conditions of fleubotomia testify to you so above.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the plague flows and bleeds, then it is necessary that you take care of the retention of it just as you pulverize over it a trissat zegi, unless another cause is present.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And then begin to restore the fracture on that same day, and do not prolong it, if an abscess does not occur.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	But if an abscess occurs cauterized, then you let the restoration of it go within the sixth day, until the abscess is healed, and do not approach it on the third day and the fourth of all, for you will make bad accidents occur.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	But if the cracked bone is prominent over the uncovered tendon, then it is necessary that you reduce and heal that just as with your hands with facility and with little extension.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	But if extension is not prepared for you and the position of it with your hands, then you reduce that just as with your hands with this tool; and this tool is made of iron, the length of which is seven digits or eight, and its breadth according to the quantity of the plague; and it is necessary for the physician who takes three or four according to the quantity which induces that in the cure in all kinds of fracture.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And it should be turned inside out, and there should be little roughness so that it is not folded over when the pressure is applied during the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And it should have an acute tip to which is attached at its own ends; and the top of it should be thick, and half of it should go into the incisions.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is the shape of it:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	And it is called in Greek "labra volant atelarem", which means a small spatula.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	So that when the end of it is placed on the prominent end of the bone, it is elevated above it.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And it pushes the bone into a hollow, and then return the bone to its normal position with some traction.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And then try to bring the ends of the fracture together, and if the broken end is thin, and does not take the instrument well because of its small size, then you must insert that bone end so that the instrument can do its work.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	But if you are unable to reduce the bone at all with what we have recommended, then cut it with one of the cutting instruments as best you can.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	Then smooth away any roughness and small bumps on the bone.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone is reduced, and suddenly the patient feels great pain while being bent, then you know that the bone has not been returned to its natural position; and then do what you know will benefit the patient greatly.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When you have finished restoring the bone, then immerse it in black styptic wine, and especially if it is summer, and do not apply a poultice or any other cause which will bring about swelling and corruption.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And then administer stars in the hour of your completion of the restoration of the bone, and leave the wound uncovered so that you may insert the hook with tweezers according to the amount of the wound.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And be very careful not to strain the wound with the fracture, for many times foolish doctors have done this and caused death or corruption or putrefaction in their patients, which is unsanitary.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if it seems loose, soft, different from the other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the wound is large or is a bad wound, and you fear any of those bad accidents which we have mentioned, and pain occurs in that place, then do not put stars on it, but make an envelope of hard rags in place of stars and strengthen it with those.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And when about a day or two has passed and the wound begins to suppurate, then you must remove the cloth which you had placed over it with wine, and then administer poultices, according to our custom is that we treat wounds, also with tetrafarmacon poultice and similar to that.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	And it is good for you to loosen the bandage and examine the wound every day morning and evening until it is consolidated and closed, and that the limb be prepared in such a way that the swelling runs from it into the surrounding areas with ease.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If after many days the wound is not consolidated or the suppuration has ceased from it, then you know that here there are small problems so that wherever you touch the wound, it hurts.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And of those small problems which are separated and extracted, those from which the member is not separated and which cause pain when pricked, pierce them according to what is possible for you.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	And if suppuration or redness occurs to the wound, which are stamen, or another type of corruption and putrefaction, then do not place on it any of those from which the cure is preceded, a narrative of which is given in its chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o .xxx.; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And of that from which you must not be ignorant and make your prediction: when a large bone is broken, it protrudes above the member like the bone of the thigh or the helper, and alike to those of the large members, and do not presume traction on it, nor its extraction for many times death has occurred because of this; let it remain as long as it pustules, for it will fall off by itself after about 20 or 30 days. And then cure the wound if it is seen to you, and if not, leave it.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter .XX.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	Of the cure of nodules which occur in the path of a fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Many times this nodule occurs in the path of healing of a fracture, and mostly it is near the joints, and it is irritated by its own action; and very often the member is prohibited from its own operation.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Then consider if the nodule is recent and administer to it medicines which have astringed like aloes, and senna, and mallow, and plantain, and like these; in such a way that you take some or all of them, and mix them with styptic wine, or white wine, or sour wine, and apply this to the nodule on a piece of cloth, and constrict it on it with good constriction.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	And let the constriction be as long as possible for many days; and then loosen it and repeat another, until the nodule is swollen; or strengthen on it a sheet of lead descantingly, for lead has property to soothe all that is inflamed in the limbs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if the nodule is already turned to stone and tight, and necessitates causing it to be split open, then cut it along the highest part of suppuration, and insert the excess and prominence, or cut it with some sharp instrument until it is swollen; and cure it as it heals.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter .XXI.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	Of the restoration of a fracture when it is restored and what happens then to the member if it is thin and weak according to its nature.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture is restored, and then what happens to the member if it is thin and weak, then this is not done except for several causes: one of which is the abundance of suppuration of the wound and the ligature of it not according to nature; or by excess of swelling of the ligaments through which nourishment is prohibited from flowing to the member; or by abundance of heat; or by excess of movement not in its time; or by weakness of blood in the patient's body and of debility.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	And the cure of this is to cause the patient to eat and make his heart tender so that blood is multiplied in him; and administer bath; and put gum and lettuce over it.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	And then apply poultice over the member, so that the poultice attracts nourishment to it, or continue fomentation of it with warm water, until nourishment flows and returns to its natural figure.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter .XXII.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	Of the cure of bones broken when they are restored bent and prohibited from their own operation of what it is necessary for.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When it happens to the member already restored that healing of bentness and eminence occurs to the broken bone and nodule, and is fed from its form, but nevertheless the member is not prohibited from its own operation, then do not accept the word of him who examines this member that it is newly broken.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	But now are many foolish doctors and restorators who have done this in our land; and this operation is very blameworthy having presented great fear, the sign of which is deadly.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	But if claudication and nodule are recent, then let them be fomented with warm water in which they put soft herbs, as well as the leaves of mallows and their roots, and mallow, and like these; and let an ointment be made from it with emollient ointments, or let it be pressed with white poplar bark and be applied to it; or let it be bandaged with a poultice of poplar bark and be bound to it; or let it be pressed with fat of stearic acid and be bound to it; or let the fat of stearic acid be mixed with oil of camphor, and be applied to it.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And sometimes it is dissolved by frequent friction, however light, with the hands wet, and motion of the affected part in all directions at all times.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	But if the tortuosity has progressed further and become strong and turned into stone, and is causing pain that demands treatment with iron, then let the pus above be opened and the continuation of the bone be dissolved, and that which is superfluous in the nodules of that joint with the bone be cut away with thin instruments, and let ease be administered to it by solicitous care and study.
Capitol .xxiii.	Here is Chapter 23:
De sermo en dislocacio.	Of speech in dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is the displacement of one of the joints of its place, by which motion is prohibited, and the form of the limb is changed, and it causes great pain and serious injury to the patient.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore when any dislocation happens, it is necessary to reduce it immediately, and not delay in reducing it, for if it is delayed, the joint becomes calloused, and it is made very difficult by this to reduce the dislocation.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And for that reason it is not good to be pressed upon or stretched in the hour of callousing, for often it causes spasms and pains in them.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	But when it happens, then you should have recourse to phlebotomy on the patient, and let the callous be left inside while he rests; and the limb should be fomented with tepid water and oil, and then reduced with ease.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And every limb be treated by that from which its memory will return to its place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And you have already and orderly arranged the chapters on dislocation according to what is preceded in fracture, from the highest part of the body down to the lowest part.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter 24:
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	Of treatment for dislocation of the lower jaw.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	The two jaws are dislocated if not bitten; and the dislocation of both is made in one of two ways: they are either pulled from their places by slight motion and slightly softened, or else dislocated throughout and completely, so that they are drawn back at the joint where saliva flows from the mouth of the patient, and he cannot hold it nor close his mouth, and his tongue is wrapped around his words.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	But when its dislocation is slight, then in the greater dispositions it returns by itself for slight cause.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	But if the dislocation is entire and complete, then let reduction of it be administered slightly, and not be delayed in any way.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the minister should hold the head of the patient, and let the doctor insert his finger from one hand into the root of the dislocation of the mandible inside the mouth of the patient, if the dislocation is on one side; or that he inserts both fingers together, if the dislocation is on two sides, and the other fingers of his hands are outside holding them open; and command the patient to cease moving his mandibles and to relax those in every part; and the doctor should hold the mandible and press it in while it returns to its place.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if reduction of it is difficult, and especially if both mandibles are dislocated together, then administer evaporation with tepid water and oil, so that reduction of both be made slightly and not delay the reduction of both in any way, as we have said.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And when they have returned and are closed, and the mouth of the patient is not softened, then pause upon them powders of linen with cerot, made from wax and rose oil; and let it be bound up with ease by mild ligatures.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And let the patient sleep on his back, and let his head be held between two pillows, so that he does not move it to the right nor to the left; and do not force him to chew for any cause; having his food be meat of lion, so that when the pains are increased and the mandibles are swollen, then let him chew what he will.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And let that be administered with ease, and do not work upon the opening of the mouth after eating and drinking and waking, so that the mandible is swollen and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if reduction of two mandibles is difficult when they are dislocated at any time and not returned to their places, then often it happens that fevers and constant sweating occur, and very frequently the belly of the patient is swollen, and he vomits pure bile.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you see this, then know that it is fatal; and often the one to whom it happens dies within seven days.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25:
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	Of reduction of the dislocation of the collarbone and of the extremity of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	Collarbone is not dislocated from within throughout its continuation with the shoulder; and sometimes it is dislocated at the part that is outward, and that is declared in sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And its restoration is that the patient lies on his back and extends his arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	And then compress the joint with your palm with strong compression, for it will return.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And then pause upon it poultice and powders, and bind that strongly.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	But the extremity of that which touches the shoulder and is continued with it, is not dislocated in any day; then let it be reduced and closed according as we have said and as it is prepared for you.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And then pause upon it poultice, and powders, and constriction, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until he is healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And with this method of cure is reduced the extremity of the muscle when it is separated from its place.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26:
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	Of the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	Know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, of which one is that it is dislocated at the part of the shoulder joint to the lower part.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is that it is dislocated at the part above the muscle, and that is done suddenly; and it is not dislocated at the parts behind by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the parts in front by the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And most often it is dislocated and drawn out at the parts below by the shoulder joint, and most often in those of which the flesh is thin, it is dislocated easily; but in those of which there are many meats, it is drawn out with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And very often it happens to certain men by impact or blow, and the muscle of him is calloused with callous, and it is injured for that which has already been dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Therefore let you know this while you are standing over him, and then proceed in the cure of him.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And the dislocation of it is known when it is at the parts below by the shoulder joint; so that you distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the intact muscle, for you will see a manifest difference; and you will feel in the head of the muscle concavity and above the shoulder joint from the touch of the head of the muscle as though there were a hole, and the patient cannot reduce his hand to his shoulder, nor move that at all.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If the foot or ankle is dislocated, you will feel a clear bump and it will not be hidden.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And from this dislocation, there is an easier reduction when it is fresh and the patient is a child.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction of it is that the minister lifts up his hand to the parts above; and then he places his fingers under the patient's chin, and lifts up the joint with strength into its place, and the minister lifts up his hand, and extends that so that it returns more easily.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	But if it does not return through what we have said, and so from the beginning that the dislocation occurred, after several days, then let the patient be bathed in warm water and let it be anointed with a liniment that softens, just as though his skin were razor-burned, with anise, fenugreek, and melilot in water, and let it be administered.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	And then the patient is laid on his back and a wool pad is placed under his chin, held between elevation and compression, and then the doctor places his heel on the sphenoid bone, and lifts up the top of the muscle with strength, and pulls the patient's hand so that it is not burned at the parts below, and another minister holds the top of the patient's head so that it is not burned at the parts below, for as soon as this is done the joint will return to its place.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you wish, reduce it in this manner: and have a man who is taller than the patient stand on that side, and place his hand below the patient's chin and lift up the chin towards the parts above while the patient is suspended in air, and another minister pulls the patient' hand from the parts below his belly.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	But if the patient is light, then let him be suspended by another cause, for the sake of gravity, for the dislocation will return at once.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And it is reduced in the same manner: and it is that a long pole be placed on the ground, the top of which is round in shape, like a mortar, neither thick nor slender, and then let the patient be placed under it; and then let linen be placed over the pole, and the patient stand according to the length of the pole, and then let his hand be extended towards the parts below the other part; and let his body be extended from the other side with strength, for the joint will return to its place quickly.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if it is difficult to reduce it by all the causes we have said, then use this cure: and it is that you take a pole of two cubits in length, and four digits in breadth, and its thickness is taken from the chin according to this form:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And then over the round head let linen be tied so that the pole does not hurt the patient.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And then let the patient's chin be placed under it, and his hand or arm extended over the pole towards the parts below, and let the pole be tied to the assistant's waist, and his arms and the end of his hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	Then let the arm be placed on a rung of a ladder according to its breadth, and the hand extended towards the parts below, and the other body suspended from the other side, for the joint will enter at once.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when its medicine is complete according to whatever way it is possible for you, then let you place under the chin a sponge of equal quantity; and then place plaster prepared from mill-powder with honey and egg white over all the muscle, as though it were rolled upon it, and then press down on the chin with decent tightness; and let the bandage be rolled over the plaster, and his hand be attached to his neck, and let him lie, and not hurt his hand for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And let the food of the patient be reduced a little, while the member is comforted, for it is easier to heal him.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And then let his food be increased after seven or five days and let exercise be given to him; and if it is firm and not soft, then he has healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	But if the joint is dislocated many times by moisture that occurs in him or by another cause, then let it be cauterized with three cauteries, as was said before in the chapter on cauteries.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if all of this is done and then after seven days the bandage is removed and the joint is not firm, and the plaster and tightness are reduced upon it several times, and it is not firm, and can't raise his arm to the parts above, then know that its nerves which are at the top of the muscle have been cut or extended or made soft, and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	From the dislocation that is made to the feet and the breast or the back parts, its reduction is done by pushing and extending with hands, as it returns.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And let the other tightness be administered upon it as it is healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if after the healing the heaviness increases upon the member and the movement of it delays, then let the patient take a bath several times so that this heaviness is eased and he returns to his first nature.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter .XXVII.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	Of the cure of dislocation of the neck.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	Know that the joint of the neck is dislocated with difficulty and returns with difficulty; and it is dislocated to all parts, and especially to the front part more than the back part, and its dislocation is not hidden from you because it hangs down below the shoulder or below the touch according to whatever figure it is dislocated, and when you adjust the neck that is dislocated with the head, this is declared to you manifestly, for the joint is hollowed out and cannot bend the arm, nor touch with that the muscle itself.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And let you know that your neck and reduce the dislocation at once before an abscess comes upon him with a cautery, for if an abscess comes upon him with a cautery, it is difficult to reduce it, and it is not healed of all; and especially when it is at the back parts, for it is the worst of all kinds of dislocation, and of greater pain, and many times they die from that.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And the restoration of it, when it is possible to reduce, is that his hand be extended with two hands, and his arm be expanded, and the doctor's hands be upon the neck and under him, and he press the joint with the knuckles of his fingers or with the palm of his hand rolled in so that it turns into its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	But if the dislocation is to the front parts, then it returns so that he bends his hand with his hand, as he pierces the neck with the palm of his hand rolled in.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not obey the reduction, then administer a strong and violent extension.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And it is that two ministers extend the arm, and hold that joint so that it is not burned by the extension.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	And then let the arm be rolled all around as it is wrapped in a folded cloth over his hand, or bandage.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, let it be anointed with some oil so that it is helped by causes which help in the lubrication of the joint with ease; and then press the joint with strong pressure as it returns.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	And then its reduction let it be that the plaster upon which it is placed be stiffened and dried with egg white, and let it be stretched with decent tightness, and his arm suspended from the neck, and let him lie for several days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And then he should be unbound; and if the joint is formed in its place, then you unbind his ligament and leave it.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see that the joint is not stronger, then you repeat the plaster and the ligament, and leave it for a few days until it is strengthened; then unbind it.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	But if there is a heaviness that happens to him in the reduction of the joint, and its disposition is in movement, then administer moisture by bath and subtle friction, compression while he is moved away; or pause over the joint a poultice, if it is a mobile joint; then bind it, and leave it for the day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And then stop that, and put him in a bath; and when he is dry, then you rub the joint with temperate friction, and then repeat on it an ointment, if it is swollen with fluid, once, and the second, and the third day,
corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denolam intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	Already corruption has come about the wound' s innermost part, while it is filled with pus.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you want, pause over that split a wet and warmed-up cow's udder with blood and strengthen it over there; and do that several times, because that is wet and returns to its disposition.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter .XXVIII.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	Of the cure for a dislocation of malasan, which is of the joint that is between the arm and the hand.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	Malasan of the hand sometimes is displaced, and the reduction of its dislocation is easier, and the contrary is of the other joints, but however there must be velocity in the reduction of it in the hour in which it is displaced, before that the site is pustularized or pustules happen to it.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the reduction of its dislocation is that you place the joint of the patient's hand on a table and him extend his hand, and the doctor places his hand or his palm on the prominence of the joint, and press it in while it returns to its location.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	But however there must be considered if the palm is already turned towards the palm of the hand, then the patient places the back of his hand on a table against the extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is previous to the back of the hand, then the position of the hand of that one intrinically on the table, so that the doctor's hand boxes over that prominence of the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And therefore if it returns immediately, it is good; and if not, then strengthen that with plaster yielding the pustule and leave it, and do not repeat it, because otherwise, he will not endure or be able to bear the reduction of it until days have passed over him.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	But however the joint is bent according to its tortuosity; and do not notice to the patient any cause, except that the hand is softened and cannot strengthen anything; then know that the nerves are pinched or cut, and then there is no remedy in him unless it is strengthened with cautery near the place of it and make it strong there is no remedy.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	Therefore when the malasan is returned, then pause over it plaster which we have mentioned, and let it be left and strengthened for a few days; then unbind it and let his hand be exercised.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	But if its movement is stopped and there happens to it some heaviness, then soothe that with warm water and friction a few times, until it is moved away.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter .XXIX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	Of the cure for dislocation of the thumb.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Sometimes the thumbs are displaced completely apart.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when any of those fingers is displaced to the back of the palm or to its belly, then press and push the displacement of it with your fingers, until it returns.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	Then support the head of the finger, and suspend that over the part to which it is displaced, and leave it for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	Then suspend that and extend that until it is straightened in that its day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when it is morning, loosen that according to that narration, and do not stop unbinding it in the day and exercising with movement, and loosen that in the night; and do that for a few days until it is tight.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And do that same thing with that if it is displaced to the belly of the hand, and loosen that to that part and do with it its first operation, until it is healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And likewise do with that if it is displaced to the other parts.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter .XXX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	Of the cure for dislocation of the shoulder joints.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When there happens to any of the shoulder joints or the neck a complete dislocation, and they remain only the shoulders out of their places, then in that there is no cure, because death pursues the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	And the sign of that is that the digestion of the patient is outside his will, and he cannot retain it; and often times some members of him are softened or two legs of him or two arms of him, or one of those; or one joint is displaced out of its location, because often times there is displacement and the removal of those to four parts.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Then that one is displaced to the back parts and is named luxation.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	But its cure is that then you consider if the luxation happens from childhood, because in that there is no cure or of that there is no healing at all.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	But in that one which comes from falling or striking against those, then the Ancients gave the manner of cure with prolix speech, of which the most returns with profit; but I and the few excuse the excess of me, because of my proximity to my intention exposing it, with which I have exposed that and spread out that.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And I say in luxation which happens to the front part in the feet, there is no remedy or healing of that; and likewise in that one which is done to two sides.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And of those none is healed except that one which happens in the shoulder precisely with that which I return to it.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And let the patient be extended over his face on a flat surface, and let him be extended under him instrument wet so that he is not bent at the feet of him.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	Then a straight staff be placed, fixed in the ground at the end of the stake around the head of him, and another staff in a hole the feet of him in the other extremity of the stake.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	And one minister holds the staff, and it is not fixed in a hole; and another minister has the other according to that form.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	Then wrap around the head of the patient and under the tits let them be stretched by a lion-wasp; and extend the end of the band to the staff which is over the head of him, and loosen that in him; then strengthen the other band over the buttocks of him the knuckles of him, and under his legs; then tighten all the bands and loosen those in the other staff which is over the feet of him.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	Then the ministers each extend the band to the end of the staff, and let the two staffs and the bands of their locations in which they are fixed not be displaced, but however do not stop as I have said before.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the doctor pauses his palms over the shoulder with strength until it returns, or let him pause over that a table, and then adjust over the table his feet until it returns.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	But if it does not return by that form, then take a table of which the breadth or length is in a hole four arms, and a cavity in the wall of which I have said before is near the patient a place into which the end of the table.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And then place the middle of the table on the spine, and the doctor places his feet on the other end, and stretch well so that the spine is compressed and returns to its place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you want, open a turn which is twisted by hand; and it is that you place on the ground behind the head of the patient at the height of two fists, the length of which is one arm, and behind his head at the height of two fists; and let the distance between each post be a palm, and now there is made in each post a hole through which the rope passes, and each is firmly fixed to the ground so that it does not move.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And there is placed a round post in which is the turn, and it is wound around the two holes of the two posts.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at its end there is a hole through which the post passes, the length of which is a palm where it is wound; and on the other two posts there are similar ones.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	Then stretch the ligaments that you have tightened on the patient's feet in the hole that is behind his head, and the ligaments that you have tightened on his thighs in the turn which is behind his feet.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	Then place each turn and have an assistant twist the turn with their hand, and the doctor bends the spine as we have said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is the form of the turn:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	Then, after the spine has returned and the place has been greased, you must apply plaster of Paris mixed with egg white, and then stop it; and then place over the plaster a plate of wood whose width is three digits or so, and the length of which is the quantity that takes up the area of the hunchback, and over the spine its thickness.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And then it should be bound with ligaments as we have said, and let the patient take subtle nourishment until he is healed.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if any swelling remains in the area at the end of the healing process, then let potions that soften and smoothen be administered by application of the table for a long time, which we have recounted; and now lead is applied to that place.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And sometimes swelling occurs in the back of the spine, and it is cured by that dislocation; and it is that bone which one should be wary of so that there is no protrusion to him by this medicine, for it will certainly bring about his death.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	Of the cure for a dislocated hip.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	Know that the joint of the pelvis and the joint of the muscle do not move except by dislocation only, and it does not happen to those which happen to the other joints of slight removal and concavity.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the joint of the pelvis is dislocated according to four manners, for it is dislocated at its parts within, or at its parts without, or at its parts before, or at its parts behind.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And most often it is dislocated at its parts within, and rarely at its parts before or behind.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	And the sign of its dislocation at its parts within is that when you touch the leg of the patient with your hand, it is longer and the hip joint is more prominent than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend his foot due to the tongue-like protrusion, and there is the place where the tongue-like protrusion is pustular due to pustules, so that the head of the thigh has come here.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	And the sign of that which happens to dislocation at its parts without is that his symptoms are contrary to those above.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	And the sign of that which happens to dislocation at its parts before is that he spreads his leg according to his will, but still cannot bend it without pain where it hurts in the hip; and if he tries to walk and cannot go forwards on the tiptoes of his feet, his urine is retained and there is pustulation where he walks, and he has to walk on his heels.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	And the sign of that which happens to dislocation at its parts behind is that he cannot spread his hip, or bend it in front of him where he walks; and his leg is shorter than the other, and there is softening of the hip joint, and the head of the thigh protrudes towards that place.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	However, the reduction of this dislocation is that you should consider, then, if the dislocation is old and ancient, and it has been aged by having it reduced and remaining according to its condition, then there will be no cure in that; and afterwards there will be no protrusion.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	However, in the one for whom the dislocation is recent, and it is one of the four kinds of dislocation, then you turn to that which he wants and extend it towards its parts within and without, and also to his right and left, for it will return quickly and does not need another cure.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	However, if it does not return in this way, then you should prepare a strong servant and extend the leg of him from the lowest part, or with his hands on top of them over the hip joint; and another servant extends his hand over his anus that puts his fingers below his testicles; and then stretch with ligaments on the root of the thigh, and have another servant hold the end of the ligament.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And let his extension be from the part within towards the ankle, or from the part behind to the part of the chest.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And let all those extensions be in one moment while the patient is elevated by his body from the ground and hanging bent.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	And this species of extension is common to all four.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And therefore if the dislocation returns as we have said, then it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to all that I will say about the proper cure.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the proper reduction of it, when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is at its parts within, let the patient be placed on his back; and then place the ligaments over the root of the thigh in that place between the head of the thigh and the place below the hip joint; and then stretch the ligament to the highest part of the ankle towards the highest part of the furcula.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And then let another strong servant grab his arms and press the large place of the hip joint and stretch to its parts without by violent extension, for it will return to its place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this species is the most gentle cure by which that member is reduced more than the other species.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	However, if he is stubborn and does not obey this species of cure by all means, then let his two feet be bound together with strong ligaments, gently, over both heels and both hip joints.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And let the length of each of his parts be the quantity of four digits, and let the leg of him be extended but the other by the quantity of two digits.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And then let the patient be suspended over the head of the post, and let him be in the middle; and let his length from the ground be the quantity of two yards.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And then command a strong young man to press the head of the thigh, and let another young man be suspended by the patient, and the other young man press the thigh with strength, for the joint will return to its place with speed.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	However, in the proper reduction, when it is dislocated to the part without, let him lie on his back according to how we have recommended regarding his hunchback; and let the ligament be tightened over the hip joint properly and over his feet.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And then two sticks are placed, one at the feet and the other at the head; and the sticks are adjusted to the middle of the hip on which dampened cloths are wrapped so that the patient is not harmed by the stick being between their thighs, so that the extension to the parts below is not drawn.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And then each assistant extends to his part, and the doctor has his hand open in the reduction according to the art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	So if there is an obstruction and swelling occurs, it will go down significantly; otherwise, apply pressure on it with great care as we have said in the case of a hernia.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	But ensure that the patient lies quietly on his back.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And if the dislocation is to the front parts, then ensure that the leg is extended slightly and it will be according to this narrative on the hip; and the doctor places the palm of his right hand over the collar bone of the patient, and then with the other hand he grips it tightly, and with this grip he extends the leg out to the foot at the part of the dislocation.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	And if the dislocation is to the back parts, then it is not necessary that the patient's leg be extended out, and he must be elevated above the ground; when he is lying on his side with his hip dislocated outwards according to what we have said about his positioning on two sides, and he is on his face and his limbs are extended according to what we have said, then there is no worry.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And it should be administered with pressure using a board over the location of the joint.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	So when the reduction is complete according to what we have said — and the sign of its completion will not be hidden from you, and it is that you extend both legs of the patient, and when you see those signs and the patient stretches out his leg and expands it without any excuse, then you will know that the limb has returned to its proper place — and then you should bring the two thighs together and apply a poultice and bind with a bandage so that the hip is not harmed in either of its parts; and let the patient rest for three or four days.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	Then loosen the poultice and bandage, and compare one leg with the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	If you see those signs in full, then know that the dislocation is already closed and then let the patient walk.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any cause for softening, then return and plaster it, and extend it according to your first extension, and let him be in three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	Then loosen that, and make him delay walking for a few days, until he is comforted.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter .xxxii.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	Of the cure of neck dislocation.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The neck is dislocated in three ways: it is dislocated outwards, inside, and to the bottom but not to the front.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of its dislocation is that you command the patient to apply his collarbone with his thigh; then know that the neck is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of all of its ways is that you make the patient lie straight, so that he extends his leg if he can on it; adhere two fingers to his face, and place the sole of his foot between your feet; then make someone else extend his leg while the neck returns to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And the sign of its reduction is that his collarbone adheres to his thigh with effortless lifting.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Then plaster it and make the collarbone adhere to the thigh, and then bind them together with a bandage for three or four days, and then loosen those.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not use the patient for walking for a few days, until he is healed and comforted.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	But if its reduction is not possible for you, then administer strong extension with the limbs of which in the cure of the hip there is preceding narrative.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter .xxxiii.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	Of the cure for dislocation of the ankle.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The ankle is sometimes hurt by small removal, and sometimes it is dislocated according to completion, and its dislocation is done either inside or outside.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the sign of its dislocation is that you see the ankle swollen proceeding to the part to which it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	But its cure for removal is of slight reduction, and it is extended with ease with hands and is wrapped until it returns.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	But in its cure when it is dislocated according to completion, you must make the patient lie straight, and have a strong and valiant minister from behind press him on his hip.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	Then you with your right hand take the highest part of the foot from above, and with your left hand take the lowest part of the foot in the location of the ankle.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	Then pull the foot to you with your right hand, and then twice with the left, and extend with the left; and press the sole of the foot with the right because of the collarbone there is work.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And do that two times according to what we have counted.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	Then press the sole of the foot on the collarbone the third time, and you are at the ankle.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	So if it returns in one or two according to this manner, and you see the foot soft, it is good; otherwise, repeat the operation on it until it does return.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	But if it is prohibited for you to reduce it with what we have recommended, then let the patient lie on his back on earth, and stretch a wooden post in firm earth, and that it be between his thighs, and you have already wrapped a cloth around him so that he does not hurt the patient.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	Then the minister of him has his thighs, and then another minister extends the foot with their hands or with the limb that lies over the collarbone; and each minister extends against the extension of his pair, and the post is extended between the thighs of the patient, so that his body is not drawn to the parts below because of its extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	Then the doctor grabs the dislocation with his hands, and another minister has the healthy thigh at the parts below, because the dislocation returns with ease.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	So when the dislocation returns and you are shown the health of its reduction, then plaster it and extend that with strong limbs, and tie the foot to the collarbone.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And you must be careful or watch out for the nerves which are behind on the ankle, so that the limb over it is not vehement and lead that strongly.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	Then let him be in two or three days; and if the limb is softened, extend that.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	Then loosen that on the third day or fourth, and prohibit the patient from walking for 40 days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	But if he is forced to walk before that space, it is not certain that the dislocation is not dissolved and ruined, and then that he does not receive cure.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if it happens to him wound blister, then you must minister in the healing of him that in which our narrative preceded, at another location of cure and of fomentation, until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter .xxxiiii.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	Of the cure for dislocation of the fingers of the feet.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	Let him who is dislocated be greased with a little oil; and that which is not difficult, rather than being easy.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	But if the dislocation is in any bones of the chest, then let him make the patient lie on his back on the ground or a table, and be lying as if he were walking.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	Then you stand on your feet, and place your hand over what protrudes from the joints, and then press that with your foot with strength until it returns, and see that it is greased and there is no protuberance in the location.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	And then place under the chest of the patient a board which covers the whole chest, to which are two ends, and then tighten that with decent and firm strapping for three days; and then loosen that and let the patient rest from walking for several days, until he is healed and his healing is assured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	Of the kinds of dislocations that are done with a blow or with a fracture or with any impaction.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When any of those causes happen to you and you are proficient in the cure of that and in the restoration of him, many times death ensues.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And therefore you should not presume about the cure of him, but let him who is wise in the art, with a long experience, be merciful and compassionate, mild, not hard and presumptuous; and that he use in the beginning medicines which yield apoplexy cauteries only so much, and let the patient trust in divine judgement, except to him by whom you expect salvation from ruin, in the alleviation of the illness, and in which some hope appears.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And then try to make him the reduction at the beginning of the cause, before he receives an apoplexy cautery.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And then if the member returns according as we want, then administer a regimen which yields an apoplexy cautery and cures the blow with that which convenes to him of the dry ointments.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if the dislocation is with a fracture and it happens in the separated bones, then you are proficient in their binding, and do in that which we have said in the simple illnesses of that from which they come.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And guard and avoid according to your ability that of the instrument in the ways of fear according as my preaching is preceded to you; for that is better for you to your Creator, and more permanent to your glory, and more salutary to your true body, those in your time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Thus end the words of Albucasim perfectly from which God be praised.
Amen.	Amen.
