Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Thus begins the discourse of Al-Bucashi .
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	O, son, I present to you this book, which is the last of medical science, in order to complete it as far as possible; for its explanations and declarations, I consider that I have completed it to you with this treatise, which begins with a description of surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	Since surgery is laid down in our region and at our time completely deprived; so much so that the science of it, and its indications, are left out; and only a few small descriptions remain in the books of the Ancients, who mistook them and put them into such error and confusion as to render their intentions and forces ineffective and their art useless.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And I consider that I have brought life to that in the order of this treatise in that second way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and because it comes with the forms of surgical instruments of cauterization and other instruments by addition of the statement, and for preparation thereof, which is necessary cause.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	The cause why a good surgeon does not practice his art in our time is that the science of medicine is long; and because he does not find himself in front of anatomy which joins and separates its parts; and has knowledge of the growth of bones, nerves, and ligaments, their names, and the shape of each; and knows the pulsating and quiet veins, and the places of sensation from them.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And therefore I say that I put a name to it which is a man; less in the work small, and more so in the art of surgery.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	But we have already said in the introduction of this book; for one who does not know that I have spoken to him about anatomy, it is not clear that he will not fall into error whereby men will die; so many are there of those in this science and those who are drawn from that science and put themselves into that art, which they know little about.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	Since I saw a doctor leave the head of a woman with a large abscess and cut some arteries in her neck that flowed with much blood, causing the woman to die among those who were operating on her.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And I saw another doctor who thought that he had passed urine in his body, which was large, and went to him and cut it with a thread from the bladder, so that this man died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And I called out to him to extract that, and I saw that because of the size of the urine and the state of the patient, it was clear that he would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And I saw another doctor who was paid a fee from our land for surgery; and he was looking to break the hernia of that man with his hands, and prepared the doctor in his ignorance, breaking it on the skin with powdery and steel tools, and did not allow the skin to move.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	Then he did it according to his desires and prayed, and ordered us to cut the ligamentos; and thus, for the sake of a few days, the hernia and the foot were cut, and came to ruin.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And I was called to do it; so we took off the ligament and found complete peace and relief from their pain.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	But nevertheless the corruption was confirmed in the limb, so I could not hold back that pain; and I kept walking with that corruption in the limb until the patient died.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And I saw another doctor who had pierced a cancerous abscess and it became an ulcer after some days; so the evil of it spread to its lordship.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	This is because the cold cauterization is pure of melancholic humor; but it does not cover that it should reach all parts, but rather which is affected by that all.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And therefore, my children, it is necessary that the operation be divided into two operations: one of which is carried out in order to save life, and another in which it is endangered.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And I have already placed in this book where it is necessary to put on the second operation, which is error and fear; so that you must put on those books, and let them not prevent you from speaking and making your faces pleasant.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And therefore take your weapons with perseverance and protection of God; and may your diseases be lightened and your difficulties be overcome.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best way through God's grace to bring about salvation and praise worthy successions; and leave behind you terrible diseases of difficult healing, and keep your weapons from here so that it does not cause you fear in your faith and your name is not avoided: for more remains in your glory, and more on the mount and less after your saints.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Guala has already said in some of his moral teachings:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	"Do not drink a bad medicine, for a bad doctor will not help you."
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And I have divided this book into three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Begin the division of the book, and first of the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter arranged by chapters under the feet, in the forms of instruments and tools of cauterization, and from this necessary to be in surgery.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter, of cutting and piercing, and of suctioning, and of extracting arrows and resembling them, completely divided and arranged according to the forms of instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	Division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, of restoration and relocation, and of treatment by twisting and resembling them; a chapter arranged by chapters under the feet, and in the forms of instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	Of fire cauterization and sharp medicine and reminder of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	With that begins the treatise of the entire book.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	I will tell you about the quality of those cauterizations and the reasons for their prohibition.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	I will say that the speech of the quality of cauterization and its reason is long and complex, and subtle by science, and hidden for those who know it; and I do not speak much of their sentences, because they are too long for me; and from them a little of their speeches is enough for me.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	I will say that cauterization includes all universal combinations; those two exceptions which are made of the same material.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the combination of dry and dead matter, they disagree; for some say that cauterization is beneficial to that, and others say the opposite, that cauterization is not effective in dry and dead matter; because the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is not suitable that the disease of the dry and dead should be healed.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And he who says that which is contrary to this, that by cauterization there is made youthfulness in all malady of the body and dried up that comes into the limbs of men, for when you compare the limbs of man with the humidity of him at the composition of fire, you find his limbs frigid.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I say by the word of that, which I experience already some times and have discovered it.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	But however I do not cover that which comes upon it that which already is stripped and exercised in the chapter of cauterization by latter exercise, and has known the difference of the constitution of men and the disposition of sickness in them, and causes of those, and accidents of their, and space of time of those.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	But in other constitutions, there is no fear on you, and more in the frigid and moist sicknesses, for already all doctors are agreed upon those, and not disagreed in the youthfulness by cauterization in them.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And know you, children, that of the secret of cure by cauterization with fire and of the goodness of it, is that the fire is simple, the action of which does not come to another member except to the one which is cauterized, and does not harm the other member with the fire applied except with little damage.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	But the action of the burning medicine comes to that in the limbs which it removes, and strongly causes the pain to come into the sick limb which has a difficult cure, and strongly causes it to come out.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	But the fire, by its simplicity and goodness, does not harm but rather makes it run off; and we have known it by experience and long service in studying this art on the truth of causes, and by this I am excused from the length of speech and if it were not that I could not read your face freely to you hidden about the fire, and quality of operation of it in the limbs and its expulsion through which it expels the diseases, with philosophical demonstration, which would be clear in your minds.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And know you, children, that they disagree about the time when it is convenient to make cauterization and pause the best moment in spring.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And I say that cauterization is convenient at any time, so that the harm by the accident of time is submerged in the youthfulness of it which is drawn up by the cauterization, and more if the cauterization is for pains or necessary pains, strongly and painfully, which do not suffer delay because they are feared by those who bring evil, which is greater than small damage entering through time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And thus I do not give advice in your cases, or children, here it is not considered but the common people and foolish doctors; therefore, to that sickness which is healed by cauterization is convenient at any time, and pause the consequence.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the cause is not given so that they care for it by fire, for cauterization is not but a place of medicine which alters the constitution and dries up the humors which are the cause from which come pains.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	But however cauterization is superfluous on the medicine by volition of its value and goodness of its operation and greatness of its lord.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	And it is possible that the sickness return at any time of the day, according to the constitution of the sick person and the place of his illness, and the goodness of it; and that which has been prepared in its limbs by the addition of the superfluous in them, and that which has come into it in its acquisition with food and resemblance to those causes; but if the sickness be subtle in a limb with few superfluities and humors, then cauterization for pain resembling that, possibly will not return in it that pain, but will make it small.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	And a vulgar word is that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine, and it is a risky speech, not to say that I understand it in it, for I believe that it is not a cure which profits by medicine or by any other cause; but by cauterization.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the cause is contrary to that; and I say that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine only when we administer the methods of cure in some illnesses, and those medicines do not confer upon it, but at the end of the cause give cauterization, and profit from it.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And here I say that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine, not according to the word which I understand from the common people and foolish doctors.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And say the fools that cauterization with gold is better than cauterization with iron, and do not say it but by the equality of gold and its simplicity.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they say that the place of cauterization does not burn, if it is not absolutely good, for I have seen it burn and turn black what was on it, but cauterization with iron makes it burn; and I say to you, if you cauterize with fire and gold, it is not revealed to you, because it is done according to the quantity which you want for the roughness of the gold, and because it prepares itself to receive the pain; and if you apply it on it without taking care, it burns the gold by the fire, and if you cut a piece out of it with a sharp tool, the gold will be revealed by the fire, and the craftsman is burned by it.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And for this, cauterization with iron should be done carefully and properly to make the operation right.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have ordered this chapter about cauterization according to the other chapters, and I have placed those within the subjects, so that the one who asks it finds what he wants of it.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	Of cauterization for headache by cold and humidity.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cauterization confers upon humidity and cold two accident causes; so is it a cause of soda and many fluxes of blood to the head from the hair, and of flowing from the ears, and of sleeping much, and of toothache and gumache, and generally in all illnesses that come by coldness, as well as in paralysis, and of the body being stiff and slow to move.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cauterization is this: first, order the sick person to vomit up by vomiting medicine the head, for three or four nights, according to whether you demand the goodness of the sickness and its age and custom.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then order him to shave his head, and then he shall sit between your legs on a bench, and place his hands upon the soles of his feet.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then pause the pressure of your palm upon the base of the nose between his ears.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	But however, when the patient says that this place is found, mark it by touch, and then apply the olive oil cauterization of which this form is:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And then place him upon the spot with touch, so that it sinks in little by little, and you turn him round.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And then lift your hand lightly and look at the spot, and if you see some quantity of the head come out, as well as the quantity of blood, then raise your hand to that place, and if it is not burned by fire, move it away from that place, so that it may be seen if there is any bone in it which I have told you about.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then take a little salt and dissolve it upon the spot, and leave it there for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then place him in the bed wrapped in a blanket, and leave that spot inside which has been destroyed by fire.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	Then treat the wound with a fourfold bitter tonic until it heals.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And it is said that when the Roman plague broke out, there was so much honey in the air that it improved and prolonged life.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And they say that it is necessary to cauterize the bone within the nose, and to keep the cautery in contact with some part of the bone's surface.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	Then cut off what adheres to the bone, and then treat it.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And they say that the cauterized part should touch the last bone, firmly pressing it within until it hurts; and this is how you treat small wounds.
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And they believe that vapors are expelled from the head by breathing through the mouth.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And the plague should be allowed to run its course for a long time, and then treated when it has hardened.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	Perhaps I do not see these two types of cauterization in detail, but according to me, they are better suited for some people; since the head is a type of member that is separated from the body by a solution of continuity, and primarily when the patient's head has fallen off naturally as we have testified in other members, and more so when the head of the patient is of a natural fall.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the first type of cauterization is better saved and suits me more; and from that one, I will make the decision about salvation.
Capitol segon.	Second.
Del cauteri del cap.	Of the head cauterization.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When the patient' head causes chronic and long-lasting pain that prolongs, and uses of scatters and purges and ointments and plasters and oils and salves, and more so if it has been cauterized with a cautery that is not used again for some reason; then consider that if the head is of strong creation in its nature; and is not a minor thing or a big mistake, then cauterize it with another cautery, leaving that one alone.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	Then cauterize that on the hairline of his head with a cautery within that the bone is broken.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Then cut off the bone and uncover it from the quantity that we have counted, and cauterize that with a cautery at the back of the head in the place which is called vesica, -- and this is the place where wind is blown out.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And I will rejoice in it if you do not uncover the bone, because the patient by water has great pain that is different from the pain of all the other head cauterizations.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And I will direct this cauterization in its place, because although that cautery with which you cauterize the hairline of the head and the occiput is subtler cauterization than that with which you cauterized the top of the head; this is the correct way to do it.
Capitol ters.	Third.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	Of the cauterization of the emigrant's non-ancient.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When pain occurs at the back of the head or in the foot is hard, or there is an internal ache in the nose, then the head should be treated by medicine, and another treatment should be administered to it, which I have described in the various treatments for the bad; and if it is not improved, then treat it with two methods: either with a sharp cauterization and a burning medicine, or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	Perhaps the treatment with a sharp cauterization and a burning medicine is not as effective as you take a dolose of alcohol, and pour it on both ends of the nose; and with both methods, treat it in two places: at the tip and the sides.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	Then cut the place that causes pain in the temple with a needle from within that it is hidden from view; and keep the bone uncovered.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	Then tighten it on the patient with a strong constriction, and keep it like that for three hours; then take the alcohol and dip the cotton wool in the solution, and place it over the affected area under the skin; and leave it there for two or three days, and then treat it by applying the alcohol to the wound.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then treat that with an ointment within that it is healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you wish to know, here are some of the medicines that I have written in the two treatment of burning medicines.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	Perhaps the treatment with iron as described above is not as effective; and this is the way to do it:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	And it is called a keyhole, because the head has this shape like a key and in its middle there is a small indentation; and at its centre is a little depression.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	Then place your hand on the area that hurts, and hold it so that the iron does not touch the skin; and turn the small piece of iron little by little with speed.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the amount of iron that is absorbed through the skin by the bone's surface is thus most, and raise your hand so that the artery is not absorbed which remains, to prevent a flow of blood from it.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then dip the cotton wool in salt water and place it on the affected area, and leave it for three days; then dip the cotton wool in the ointment little by little and treat it within that it is healed.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you see this, then treat the end of the knife according to the second treatment; and be careful not to cut into any artery in this emigrant' non-ancient.
Capitol quart.	Fourth.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	Of the cauterization of an ancient emigrant.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you treat the emigrant with the water that we have described in the previous treatment and in the various treatments for the bad, and if that treatment does not work, and many times because of the badness that it does not work to the water that we have mentioned above regarding the first cauterization with medicine or the second cauterization with fire; then treat the end of the knife according to the fourth treatment: ignite the cauterization knife within that it whiteness, as it indicates over the area that hurts, on the line of length from which most of it is affected, or that one; and then leave your hand for a moment and tighten it by applying heat.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, you should be careful not to damage the continuity of the jaw, which is very important for chewing; and that the tongue does not dry up and that its nerves do not absorb; and that it does not contract a spasm.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if you are careful about the flow of blood from the artery during the operation because it is dangerous and primarily because you do not know how to stop the bleeding in case it starts; then leave the operation at its beginning.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And I will come back to your mind of the regiment of the flow of blood from the artery according to its way, in its place of freedom.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if this bad treatment does not work for that cauterization and many times the patient can tolerate it; then treat that in its middle part according to what we have mentioned above, and heal the plague within.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you wish to know, administer the treatment that we have mentioned in the second part of the treatment of heat according to two tools; and it is better treatment for this.
Capitol .v.	Fifth.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	Of the treatment for the pain of ears.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When there is pain in the ear due to scratching and it has not been treated with the other treatment that we have mentioned in the division; then treat it with fire, and this is the way in which you should do it:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	Then turn the ear toward the fire and keep it in that position; and if the pain is due to one side of the ear, or to both sides, then treat each side separately by turning the ear toward the fire and keeping it in that position.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	As you move the cauterization towards the ear very slowly, so that you do not hurt the area around it,
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the cauterization makes points all over the ear, and then cleans those areas, and then returns to where it was to cure the wounds.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	On cauterization of torture.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	Torture that is cured and the cauterization is not anything other than the spices that come by blood, according to what we have said in the divisions of the malvases.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cauterization with the spice that comes from dryness or spasm of the nerve.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you treat this kind of torture, let the ear be cut and rinsed and dried, and if you do not cure it with one cauterization, then do three: first cut the ear, second a little in the temple, and third join the two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And pause the small cauterization on the opposite side of the torturous part, because softening comes only in the part that appears to be healthy.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	And the form of the cauterization is that you cauterize it with the cauterization on the right side of the ear, a little higher up on the lobe, and in the temple, whose length should be according to the length of the said pulse, and pause your hand so that the quantity of the spice of the wound is burned.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	This is the form of the cauterization, and it is especially for the knife, the shape of which is before the table.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	However, it is more prudent that a little should be added with a little vinegar; and when you cauterize, do so in such a way that no superfluous grease remains.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	Then return to the area that has been cut with water until it is cured.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	On cauterization of ancient apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When the apoplexy is ancient and you treat it with water as we have said, and do not confer your medicine, and the patient does not have a fever, then cauterize that four times: over all the lobes of his head; also at the base of the skull, as we have said; and on the tongue.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the way to perform the cauterization is done according to what has been said before.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And it is now cauterized over the mouth of the stomach; and there is more to follow; then return to be cured with water that has been cut.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	On cauterization of obligation performed by flame.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	Then give the patient in the beginning very large rubs and small pills, speaking with a loud voice.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	Then return to the top of the patient's head, and place your hand on his throat in order to see better with a lit candle.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	Then pause for a few moments, because that is the way to perform cauterization.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	Then pour water according to that measure that I have already said.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And if it is good for the health, then do so; otherwise, make three cauterizations on the back of the head, which are to be separated from each other according to the length of the pulse from the top of the head down to the bottom.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	Then pause between each cauterization the thickness of the said measure, and return to be cured with water that has been prepared.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	However, if the patient is drinking water, then make the cauterization in the middle; and if you see more addition, then cauterize it above the two lobes.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Then return to be cured wherever it is needed; and let the cauterization be like olive oil according to the shape that has been given.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	On cauterization of paralysis and softening of the whole body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	Then treat the head with a rub and with water as we have said; then return to the top of the patient' s head, and make the cauterization in the middle; also at the base of the skull, and three cauterizations on the vertebrae of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the softening of the body or the patient is very ill and the softening is great, then cauterize that four times on the vertebrae of the two sides; also, immediately make a cauterization that burns off part of the wound, and hold your hand over it.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	Then return to be cured wherever it is needed, and let the cauterization be like olive oil.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	On cauterization for epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	The epilepsy is not cauterized; that which causes epilepsy comes from the blood.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	Then, if you rub the head of the patient at the beginning with a strong rub and give him another cure that we have said when the patient is very ill, then return to cauterize: on the top of the head, on the base of the skull; and on the entire scalp and behind.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it is a child who does not suffer medicine, then administer with a strong rub and speak with a loud voice in front of water every day, with a good diet.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	Then return to the top of the patient' s head, and make the cauterization in the middle according to the previous method, and on the other side; also, at each lobe of his head, then cauterize the base of the skull.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is very strong and ill, then cauterize that which I have said, having a paralysis and softening of the body over the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the two sides.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	Then let the cauterization be like olive oil according to what has been said before.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	However, if the patient is a child, then pause with a very small cauterization according to this method.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	On cauterization for melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupt and moist corrupted fire, then cauterize that which we have said in the presence of paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is excessive grief that declines into melancholy, and the patient' s body is moist, then give him to drink water that softens the brain according to the water that has preceded in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	Then return to the top of the patient' s head, and make a small fire that is kindled gently; then pause that fire in the middle of the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	The patient should be fifty years old, and he should be kept in bed for an entire night.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	Then pause with a liniment; and it is now worthy of being dressed with lamb's wool.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	Then increase the fire slowly by heat that is moderate, because he should feel pain when it is half hot.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	And place him in his own spot at the top of the circle, and let him go so that he is not warmed up.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And make the patient lie down every week, one regiment at a time until they are healed; or if you prefer, cauterize that area with small points according to what is necessary for him, but having your hand on a cautery in this way: This kind of cautery moistens the brain evenly.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	Then place that spot that has been bathed in the color or the shades of blue.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	Of the Descending Cauterization with Water in the Body.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When you have described the beginning of water in the body through the channels that I have mentioned in the division, then begin to give him drinking water that softens his head, and keep that from all humidity.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	Then make a bath of salt for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	Then order him to rub his head, and cauterize that area with a cautery in the middle of the head; then cauterize that area with two cauteries on two temples if it is the beginning of water in two veins, or one cautery if it is the beginning of water in one vein.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Cut with a cautery all the veins and arterioles that are left untied; and let the cauterization be at that height in length on the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	Keep away from any flow of blood when cauterizing; and if there is a flow of blood from him, stop it with some medicine, which I will give you if it is necessary.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And come with the solution that is made from arterioles and free from those and careful to avoid any flow of blood.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And sometimes he is cauterized in the neck with two ossicles that are produced by two cauteries that move apart.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	Of the Cauterization of Ancient Tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When the tears of the eyes are old and flowing freely through the veins and arterioles that go to the middle of the head, and it is seen that they are a superfluitatum of fluid flecked, then cauterize that area with a cautery that we have mentioned in the chapter on the beginning of water settling in the veins, and cauterize that area with a cautery in the middle of the head, and two cauteries on the temples, and two cauteries in the neck between two bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if you have an addition, then cauterize that area in the whole length of the cheekbone over the outer edge of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	Of the Cauterization of a Nasal Odor.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you have described the medicine that we mentioned in the division and it does not benefit you, then prepare him with drinks of the three kinds for three nights; and cut his hair, and cauterize that area with a middle cautery and an olive cautery.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	Then cauterize that area with a nail cautery on the two temples, between the hair, with a small point.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	Keep away from the arterioles so that they do not burn.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And this is the form of the nail cautery.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	Of Cauterization to Soften the Palpes of the Eyes.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the eye is softened by illness or humidity, then cauterize that eyelid with a cautery that has this lunar shape; and this is the form of it:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you, then cauterize that above the two eyelids a small point with two cauteries in the entire length, and let them be elongated from the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	Let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of the eyelid.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	Do not press too hard on your hand with the cauterization, more according to the quantity that a third of the eyelid is adhurstied.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	Of the Cauterization of the eyelid of the eye when the hairs are converted to the inside and turn the eyelid inside out.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the hairs of the eyelid are converted to the inside in such a way that they can be turned out, cauterize it in two ways, either with fire or with burning medicine.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If it is a cauterization with fire, order the patient to stand in front of him who has the hairs converted and cut them with those that are ordinary, keeping them extended and turned out; and if he turns his eyelids inside out, then cover them with a cloth so that they are not hurt by the heat.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Then if they are cut and turned out, place the patient's head in the third position, and take his hand over the eyelids of the eyes with a thong, keeping them closed; and this is the beginning of the thong's sign, close to the hairs.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	Then place the thong in the ear wax or in a mucilage of flies on the patient's head.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	Then light the cauterization with this form:
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	Then cauterize the figure that has been drawn, little by little, with visible dots, keeping the surface of the cloth burned as it is with a mint leaf, completely.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	This is a sign of health for the work that you are doing, for you to see the eyelids of the eye already contracted and the hairs of the eyelid elevated due to the puncturing of the eyelid.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	Then raise your hand and place it on the wound for three days, and then put the thong in its cavity, keeping it clean.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then treat that with ointment, so that it is healed.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	And if it returns due to the hairs causing a loss of sight and the eyelid is softened again, then do another cauterization on that whole area with sharp points first.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	And if the hairs are in the eyelid, then cauterize that area so that it is raised to its natural position and turned out, and that the hairs do not poke into the patient' head.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And if the cauterization is with burning medicine, this is what you order the patient to do: let him cut his hair so that it is extended and turned out, and make a thong of cloth in the shape of a mint leaf.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. .i., o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	Then take a sharp knife and a lively nail. .. ii., Then mix those two together well, and make a paste of it so that it is not dried out; then spread that paste on the cloth in such a way that it has the shape of a mint leaf, and place that over one ear, and place the patient' head in the third position.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	Then put that medicine into his mouth and press it gently with your hand so that the patient feels the heat of the medicine, for the taste of the heat is in his mouth.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	Then, when the patient perceives that the medicine tastes good, then let him spit it out and place the thong on his neck; when the heat or burning sensation has passed, then wash that patient' s head with water; and then consider whether the eyelid has been raised in such a way that it is washed naturally due to the heat or the incision, for it is well done; and if not, then return to the medicine on the location where it has not been used, and do not damage your operation by returning to the medicine, and raise the eyelid again.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	Then place the thong on its edge, keeping it clean, so that the cloth is not damaged due to the adhesive; and then treat that with a different ointment, or with another medicine that heals.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And if it is necessary that you, your operation must keep your vigilant diligence so that in the wound does not fall re of the medicine, and if the eyelid is softened some days later and for any cause hair is put on the wound, then repeat your medicine about that place that the eyelid is softened, and properly as so to have done at the beginning, and approaching turn the inside that it is cured.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is the form of the mold of myrrh.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And you know that the wounds of men are differentiated according to their size and age, so according to that your compression is done.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And do not be afraid of the way of recipe to that which is studied in this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	Of cauterization of a fistula that is on the lacrimal of the wound.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you cure the fistula with the water that we have said in the divisions of the malady and do not confer your cure, then cover that you cauterize that according to this way: order the patient that he keeps his head on his chest, and has his head some minister between his thighs in such a way that it is not moved or agitated.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	Then place a cotton wisp drenched in alcohol on the patient's wound, or in a paste of woolen yarn.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then ignite the cauterization of which this is the form:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	which is made from a cane or a branch of a tree, from one end to another, so that the cauterization is done.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you see, let it penetrate within the other end.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you want to do so, then do so with care.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	However, that which is made from wood is better for the work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And then squeeze the fistula if it is open, and draw out of it and dries up that.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not open, then open that and draw out the pus of it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And then place over it the cauterization that is well ignited, and do so on the side of the nose at its root, so that your hand or the patient does not hurt, and the cauterization is placed in the greases of the wound and corrode that.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And therefore if at the beginning of the nose's cauterization blood enters into the bone, it is good; and if not, then repeat the cauterization one or two times, if necessary, and leave that there for three days, and then place over that cotton with vinegar dried up until it is cured.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	However, if it has passed eleven days and it is not cured, then place over it an acute corrosive medicine within that the bone is discovered and is scraped according to what you will in the patient' next chapter.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And another way of cauterizing a fistula that some first said: go to the place of the fistula and then pierce it and place in that crack very small of which is the form of it: And pour into that the quantity of one drop of molten lead; and do so on your hand with good retention, and do not let the lead reach the patient' wound so that it does not penetrate the wound's place; and then place over the patient' wound cotton drenched in alcohol or water, because lead adheres to the place of the fistula and cures it by a wonderful cure.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is cured by the water that we have said for cauterization and cure, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to administer three times a day and reduce the fistula to the nose' root according to what will come in its place.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	Of cauterization of the fracture of the nose.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Moles that appear as cracks in the lips, and mostly in the lips of children.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	So if you cure those cracks with the water that we have said in the divisions and do not confer your cure, then ignite a small knife according to this form so as it does not hurt:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	Be its cavity according to the subtility of a blade.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Then place that carefully within those cracks so that the cauterization reaches the root of the cracks.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And then heal that with care until it is cured.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	Of cauterization of a fistula in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When in the root of the uvula or on the palate or in the roots of the teeth there is an abscess that bursts, and then it is broken and then it is hard, and then it is cured and forms a fistula, and do not confer your cure, then cover that you ignite cauterization according to the quantity that is received in the fistula, and then place that ignited knife on the root of the fistula, and do so on the last part of it; and then heal that with water that we have said for cure until it is cured.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And therefore if the cure is separated and is cured, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to discover the place and host the bone according to what will come in its chapter.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	Of cauterization of teeth and softening of the veins.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the veins are softened by moisture and the teeth are swollen, then heal those with medicines and do not confer your cure, then place the head of the patient on his chest, and then ignite the cauterization the form that will be thus, so that you pause the cotton over the tooth and enter into that the ignited cauterization quickly, and then your hand a little within the patient to feel the heat of the fire reaching the root of the tooth.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	And then take your hand away, and then repeat the cauterization several times according to what you want.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	And then the patient spits salt water into his mouth and keeps it for an hour, and then suck that out, because the swollen tooth is closed and the softened gum is tight and the corrosive moisture is dried up.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	Of cauterization of toothache.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When toothache is by cold or it is by worm, or you do not confer the cure with medicine, then cauterize that according to these two ways: or cauterize on the edge of a cow's udder, or cauterize by fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Cauterization by the edge of a cow' udder is that you take a piece of cow' s hide and cut it into a shape, and then put that under a iron, and then put cotton around the end of the wound, and then ignite that quickly on the wound that hurts until it is softened.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And then repeat that cotton several times within that the power of the fire reaches the root of the teeth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you see, dip a wool or cotton into the edge' oil, and then place that on the wound, and place that ignited iron within that the iron reaches the root of the tooth' cavity.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	However, the cauterization by fire is that you take care of the wool or iron, and be in the middle of it a little thickness and the power of the fire does not reach the patient' mouth.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	And then ignite the cauterization according to its form, and place that on the tooth, and do so on your hand until the cauterization is softened; and then repeat that several times because the pain returns or in that day or the other day.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And then, by the power of that cauterization, the patient spits his mouth out with care and keeps it for an hour and then sucks that out, and this is the form of the cauterization.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And cauterize it as much as you can according to what is possible for you.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	This is the form of the cannula:
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter .xxii.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	On the cauterization of ekstrophy.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When ekstrophy is of pus and cold humors and does not respond to medicines, and you see the digestion of those somewhat, then do cauterization in the following way: having two open ends, so that fire can reach the apex of the apoplexy, then place a flame on that pustule once, and another if it is necessary to do so, until it enters the apex of the apoplexy.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the apoplexy is small, then do cauterization according to the quantity of the apoplexy, and leave it for three days, and pause a flame on the area for as long as it takes until it is healed up where the fire has burned it.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	Then clean it well and dress it with ointment and gauze, so that it may heal.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And this is the form of the cannula or the way to cauterize as follows:
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter.xxiii.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	On the cauterization of ringworm of the beard and on constriction of the larynx.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When moisture comes on the throat of the lung, and especially when that is cold in composition, then at the beginning make the patient empty with laxative medicines, and then cauterize it as much as possible at the root of the beard in the affected area.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And be careful not to reach the cauterization to the larynx, nor to burn with fire the cord of it, but only a little bit.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	Then cauterize it again on another cauterization at the junction of the collarbone in the last vertebra of it.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	And this cauterization should be done with a pointed instrument, following the above method.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	Then clean it well with ointment and gauze, so that it may heal.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter.xxiv.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	On the cauterization of lung disease and coughing.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When coughing and lung disease is caused by cold humors, and there is no fever or consumption, but it is old disease, then do two cauterizations on the furcula in the affected areas between the ribs and the spine; and another cauterization in the middle of the foot between two bones; and do a pointed cauterization according to the preceding method.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you want, it is called the cauterization with points, the form of which you precede in the point of pain in the ears.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And let them be made in pairs on those; and clean it well with ointment, according to what has preceded, within that is healed.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And now the cauterization is done with three flames, because there are three types of cauterization: according to this form, you can make three cauterizations:
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter.xxv.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	On the cauterization of tickling that is the top of the larynx.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the top of the larynx is dislocated by lubricating moisture and does not return to its place in the usual way, then reduce it first at the joint that is dislocated on the inside, and if necessary raise the cord that is usually placed on the outside; and bring the cord up, which is usually placed on the inside of the larynx, towards the back of the throat, with the fingers of your right hand.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	Then light two flames, and this is the form of it:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And then cauterize the cord within that penetrates that one to the other, and you will see the figure of cauterization here with two heads.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	and do it subtly according to the quantity of the attempt; and this is the form of it:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	In some cases, it is adjusted according to this count, and for that reason are these the cauterizations.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	Then place it over the cauterization point with the tip of your finger, and then let it adhere to the peace quietly, and that member is not stimulated by any means until it feels comfortable.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	If the dislocation is on the inside of the joint and it is firm, then cauterize over the muscle with a pointed instrument or a point-shaped cauterization; because the joint has been confirmed to be stable, and the moisture is moistening, and the disease is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter.xxvi.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	On the cauterization of the stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When the stomach comes in with cold and motley moisture within it that is extracted from its composition, and if you continue the methods of treatment and do not confer with them, then at the beginning, it is said that the disease is on the inside of the navel, and bring your hands up to the navel, and extend them and their cheeks, and then make three cauterizations: one cauterization leave the foot out by the quantity of a finger, and two cauterizations leave the ribs on either side of the cauterization, within that comes the triangle figure of cauterization; and extend between those that are not adjusted to each other, so they will make punctures.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cauterization is according to the quantity of the two thirds of the thickness of the cord.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And this is the figure of cauterization according to this form. And if you want, cauterize with a large cauterization in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and this form be a circular cauterization according to this form:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And be cauterized the stomach punctually according to that cauterization that frightens you: and it is because you feel pain on the stomach according to what quantity you want, then do so with a point; and clean it well with the preceding treatment, within that is healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter.xxvii.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	On the cauterization of the fractured femur.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When it is painful in the femur by cold or moisture or great wind within that is extracted from its normal composition, and if you do not confer with it, then at the beginning, it is said that the disease is on the back of the femur, and bring your hands up to the back of the femur, and feel a test according to this quantity: and this is the form of it; and this amount be placed over the femur on either side of the joint, and this form be a test on the inside of the thigh.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And this is the space between each cauterization according to the quantity of the finger, and this cauterization be according to the length of the right arm.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not move your hand at all.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the amount of water that is added is equal to the amount of the bulk of the corpse, and it has not been adjusted; and if the patient stands on his feet; and if he does not stand, then lay them down, for he has already opened his space, and raise their arms.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	This is the form of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And you can cauterize these cauterizes with a knife cautery, since it is in your subtlety and prudence in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And keep in mind that you should not process too much in the cauterization, and let the bulk of all the corpse be attached so that it is attached to the entire body and reaches within the intestines, since the bulk here is subtle; and know water.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter .XXVIII.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	Of piercing the abscess with a sharp instrument before cauterizing it.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When such an abscess is excited or inflamed and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the foot or in the skin of it, then know that if it is in the flesh of the foot, the patient will feel great pain.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the skin of the foot, then the pain is acute and often, and your feet already feel tired from treating it.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Since the patient is facing upward on his back; and approach the site of the abscess to touch it; and ignite the cautery which has been shaped like a knife, as it was previously described on the other page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And cauterize from the outside and inside, so that all the bulk is cooked, so that it reaches the navel, so that it burns and heals.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	Then heal those by treating other abscesses, so that they are healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And do not say that of this form of cauterization is used but that which is extended in the art of medicine, and on whose feet many bad cases have been known; however, I have experienced some of them being too hasty in this operation, but I prefer to leave it alone, and it is better.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter.XXIX.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	Of cauterization of splinters.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	They said that the small cautery of the splinter of arnica must be rubbed on this way to make it effective, and it is this one that you should take from a splinter of long arnica, and it is of the thickness of your finger.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	Then submerge that in oil and burn it at the fire, and cauterize with a small cautery in that place which is between the continuation of the rib cage up to the collarbone; and two small cauterizes from one side to the other, leaving a little bit down on the beard, and two cauterizes between the fifth rib and the navel, declining a little bit towards the back, then another cautery in that place which is on the top of the foot, and another above the stomach, and three cauterizes from behind the back; and one cautery in that place which is between the two sides of the foot, leaving a small amount down to the sole of the foot.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And do not say that you should move your hand with the cautery, but rather in the manifest form of the body's illness.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And already they have said that such a thing is for the men who use iron-like cauterizes to ignite it and place it in that place which is between the ribs, so that they reach those who have such an abscess and are healed, as we have said in the foot's abscess.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	But in this piercing with a sharp instrument there is no fear, since it often happens that the abscess passes through the skin and is not healed.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter.XXX.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	Of the cauterization of the hernia.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you treat the hernia's illness with water as we have said in the division of the body and do not confer your treatment, then cauterize it according to three ways, all of which are effective, that is, that you make three or four small cauterizes according to the length of the hernia according to the figure of the cauterizes on the foot, whose figure has preceded.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And between each cautery be of the thickness of a finger or a little more, and the way to make the cauterize is the same as that which we have said in the foot' cauterize, reciprocly.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not move your hand with the cautery; and the patient be facing upwards on his back.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And another way to cauterize is that you ignite the cautery with two fingers, causing it to be said in the chapter of dislocation of the muscle, and bring the bulk which is on the patient's left side up towards his back without moving the patient.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And your elevation is according to which you lift the bulk according to the length of the body, so that the cauterizes are made according to the thickness of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	Then approach the two edges with a sharp instrument, ignite it, and enter it into that place from which the bulk of the other side penetrates.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	Then remove the cautery; and there are four effective cauterizes.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you want, cauterize with a sharp instrument that has three edges.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	Then heal the cauterize before it has been burned by many travels during the day, since it is more effective than other causes preceding in the treatment.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter.XXXI.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	Of cauterization of the droop.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Do not cauterize in droop, but rather in a proper way.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you treat the droop by the methods of treatment which we have said in the division and do not confer your treatment, then know that this is how you cauterize in a proper way: make four cauterizes around the umbilical cord, one cautery on the stomach, another on the foot, another on the hernia, and another between the two sides of the navel, and one on the top of the foot, and another above the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the quantity of the depth of the cautery should be appropriate to the bulk of the hernia.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	Then leave the cauterize open so that it does not get burned for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And you do not remove the treatment of the cauterize by water so that it is added to the two sentences, and it is stirred in the water with the help of healing.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The form of the cauterize that is cauterized on the stomach is square according to which it has been previously cauterized, and this is the one with which it is cauterized on the two sides, it is olive-shaped according to which it has been previously cauterized.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter.XXXII.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	Of cauterization of the feet and the legs.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are inflamed with droop and full of clear water, then cauterize the top of the foot between the auricular and the ring finger, and raise your hand up, and do not return it all down, since the clear water drains off.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	This is the form of the cauterize: And then make two small cauterizes on each leg, and a small cauterize at the end of the knife-shaped cauterize.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And be the length of the leg: and I leave the top and the other bottom at your mid-leg location; and two cauterizes on each leg.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	Then leave the wound open for a long time to prevent any water draining from it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And treat those causes which we have spoken of.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter .xxxiii.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	Of cauterizing abdominal wounds.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When an abdominal wound is caused by heat and moisture that destroys the virtue of digestion and retention, which are in the stomach and intestines, and is treated with a strong cauterizer, then apply a large cauterizer to the abdomen according to what preceded in the cauterization of the stomach, at the circle, and four cauterizers on the subtle circuit of the bile, at the subtile clavicle; and at the cauterizing over the alcatin on broad lozenges, or two cauterizers.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if the abundant moisture is endured by the patient, then cauterize it over the pentil and intestines, and strongly with two cauterizers on the stomach and next to the hernia, for this is a perfect cure for health of which there is no other.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter  .xxxiv.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	Of cauterizing ancient hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When there are ancient hemorrhoids or a mass of thick humors or corrupt moisture, and they are treated with water that we have mentioned in the division and not used their own cure, then cauterize it with three cauterizers on the pus-filled spine of the two small ones, and over the ombelicus cut with two cuts.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if you suspect that the stomach is swollen and the food is not digested, and the face is sometimes flushed, then cauterize it on the stomach with a large cauterizer according to what preceded; and with one cauterizer on the thigh, and with another cauterizer on his tongue, a subtile clavicle, and let the cauterization stand for some time, and cure the abdomen that is to be healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter .xxxv.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	Of cauterizing atheys close to the absence of their members.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you cut off an athay, then ignite the cauterizer that is assembled at your will.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Then place the lithe in the athay that you have cut off, and bring your own hand close to the opening of the vein from which the blood flows, so that the cauterizer reaches it.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And make it one or two, because if the steps are many, then cauterize each of them according to what we have mentioned, and cure those with water that you give to their own members within so that they are healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize with a large cauterizer over the alcatin, it is more beneficial for health.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter  .xxxvi.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	Of cauterizing fistulas that are formed in the division of the members of the patient.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not obey the work that we have recommended in its place, the patient is terrified by water, heal it with cauterization.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	So, when a fistula forms in the division of the patient, and it is ancient, corrode health from it and corrupt moisture, and then water that is worthy to be tried first, and remove the quantity of its depth with the front mentioned attempt.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Then bring the lithe-like cauterizer.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And then place that lithe-like cauterizer in this fistula, and according to the quantity in which it intermixes with the attempt.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And repeat on that lithe the cauterization within so that the corrupted members are burned twice or three times, according to the quantity of your need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And beware of burning the nerves and veins; or, if the fistula goes to the core of the bladder or the core of the intestine, then beware of all those places; and do not pass water unless the fistula is in a fleshy place and you think that it does not penetrate.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the place within so that it is healed.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the place is sealed and if the matters are cut off from it, and it remains unhealed for a long time, then know that it is completely healed.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the matters are not from it, then know that it is penetrating or in the root of it, and it flows from those causes from which there will be a recollection in its place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter   .xxxvii.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	Of cauterizing the nostrils.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When there is pain in the nostrils due to heat or a strong wind, and because of this the nose of the patient is closed up, then cauterize that over the nostrils with a large cauterizer on each nostril, through which a recollection will occur.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And strongly with a small cauterizer on the second nostril, so that three small cauterizers will be applied, and then more behind for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter  .xxxviii.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	Of cauterizing the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When there is a swelling and softening in the bladder due to heat and moisture so that the patient does not retain urine, then cauterize it at the opening of the bladder with three cauterizers, starting from the spine of the right side, and then move on to the left side.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And make the length of each cauterizer according to the quantity of the blood; and cauterize it with a cauterizer in the lower part of the two, or with two cauterizers if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And make a subtile cauterizer according to what is done.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter   .xxix.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	Of cauterizing the mouth.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When there is heat and moisture in the mouth, and because of this the breathing is obstructed, and the menstruations are corrupted, and the inducement of their own breathing is delayed, and there is pain as they come into contact with their own breath, then cauterize that place with three cauterizers on the circuit of the ombelicus, according to what we have mentioned in the cauterization of the bladder; and with a cauterizer in the lower part of the two sides, or with two cauterizers, and make the cauterizing subtile.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter   .x.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	Of cauterizing the loss of speech.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When moist air is dispersed to the opening of speech, and there are causes of its own location, and the collection of it is prolonged on the other when compared between them.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the place of loss of speech is attracted in it which is worth to be tried.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	And then cauterize the patient on the opening of speech with a lithe-like cauterizer, because you will have tried in the circuit of the opening as it is rolled up, and so that the opening falls into its own place.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And make a lithe-like cauterizer with which to precede in the cauterization of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this lithe is not suitable for you, then cauterize it with three large cauterizers.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And make the cauterization according to the quantity of the bitterness of the whole thing, and then cure that place within so that it is healed.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter    .xli.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	Of cauterizing the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When there is pain in the opening of speech, and it is caused by heat and moisture, then cure the patient with water that we have mentioned without using their own medicine, and when the water is old, then know that it is an ancient disease, and then know that you are lacking in humors; and then apply a large cauterizer.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And the way of cauterizing that is according to two ways: either cauterize with burning medicines, or cauterize with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	Here comes the first sentence to translate. Do not add any comments, like "here is the translation", just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And be the space which is between each cautery the quantity of the thickness of this thing, and if the cauterize olive or great.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	May some needles be made on the head of the patient to prevent them from bleeding; and four cauterizes.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you want, cauterize the circle in which it is surrounded the form in the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle, that is a circle continent and burn the smoothness of all the chain.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	This is the way of cauterizing in ciatiqua when pain adheres to the ankle and not extended within the crotch.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	But if it is extended within the crotch, then cauterize that with two cauterizes on the crotch at the place in which you turn the patient who is the pain; and one cauterize over the shin bone for four little ones a few minutes the part cervix.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if the cauterize is a knife, and be the depth of the cauterize according to the quantity of the smoothness of the chain.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the patient is turned that the pain is extended within the place proper, then cauterize that here you turn with a cauterize for three points or four or more if it is necessary of this.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the patient is turned that the pain is in the crotch, then cauterize that here with a cauterize-knife.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And take care in all cauterization that you do not end up with the cauterize as it burns nerves or great arcery, and so by water to you is over the patient badly or contracción.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And you have already seen one of those which cauterized on the shin bone and ended up in the cauterization, and the bed fire inflated within that the tumor has achieved the foot, and fire pierced and corrupted all the foot.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	Then a great solution of stomach occurred, and death by water.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two parts together, then cauterize each according to this way.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And said the wise some in the cauterization of ankle, from this is the way: make similar a circle of iron whose circuit is the most part of a palm; and be deves their orifices according to the thickness of a finger or half a thumb.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And inside that circle be another third; and be the space between them the quantity of the nut of the foot; and may those circles open from two parts; and may be the length of those cays a nut or two, and make in those margins of iron decently apparelled in the circles; and this is the form.
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Then be lit in the fire within that it gets red-hot and sparks, and place it on the part of the ankle, the patient turned on his back.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And therefore cauterize that with three triangulaze cauterizes in one line.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then leave that for three days; then apply the plaster that is wet with vinegar to it, and leave the wound open for seven days; and then heal that within the water is cured.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	said Al-Bakhi: O son, of this kind of cauterize we have used little for the terror of the regard of him, and because by water have found few those which look over him.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	But some good cauterizes to him who suffered them, and turn that place to him.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	May cauterize with medicines that you have made two circles with iron ring-shaped hole through which should be the lever of the door of iron; and be the length of the parts in the thickness of their are two nuts or three nuts.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the space which is between each one is the quantity of the thickness of this thing; and are open from above and from below, and may contain themselves between them according to this form:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	Then place it on the part of the ankle, the patient turned on his back. and hold your hand over the part of the ankle; and take some water tail and put it between two circles, and its quality be lit with small fire little by little, and do that for the quantity of one hour, and bear with him the pain of mouth and the rustling of him - because that rustle then as if by fire - until it stops the pain.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	Then raise your hand from the instrument and wash the water tail of all the ankle with fresh water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	Then leave that for three days and place it on the plaster within that is the darkness of the rustling renewed, then leave it water by seven days, and run him with the water is cured; this one is after a cure in the night.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then heal that within the water is cured.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain is extended within the crotch or chest, then make him a statue that holds water according to what was made in the ankle.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the way of tail water, and I have written that in the treatise of the correction of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Take the alkaline and of a kind not yet known of both parts one, and tri-fold them and place it on a new wave through which the part leaves is pierced with a small hole, according to the quantity that enters in it.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	Then place above that the source of the new wave wrapped up, and take it on the alkali and the caustic of fresh water which takes those by a nut, and then put it in the tieua hand by good compression, and leave that the new wave sent out from him the water is sharp on the part left on the wrapped-up wave.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	Then adjust all that water, and place it on another caustic alive and other alkali renewed, because that one then a strong fire sharpens, which is administered in drops of medicine and cauterization of the other members, because operation makes fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And so from medicines some by which is cauterized wide, as then it sharpens and heals it quickly and causes am sabo in the morning.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And Gualia told of a man of the arts the operation and the cure by which he is healed of the pain of the ankle and sciatica, and he said that there is no need for another cure, because it is cured with one gaze then as it is strong that he put that tieue in bath and eysic already known about him.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And it is that be of certari green, and if not be vert, then be a figue recent; and a hand be tri-fold with a little gray and placed on the ankle in which is the pain, or in the crotch, or chest, and leave it open.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	Then leave that for the quantity of three hours or for the quantity that man is a hundred steps from the pain of rustling.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	Then place that in bath and then when his heart has been heated, introduce that into the water because the pain stops and is healed.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And you know that there is no need for any medicine of cauterize with these medicines but to remove the contents of the body.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	May Ja Escorides also say that when the goat's wound is cauterized with oil, then he will be well; and if be a cauterize with this way: take wool and dip it in old oil, and place it between the toes of the foot and between the teeth.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And take a piece of dry sheep's intestine, and inflame it with fire so that it becomes charcoal; then put it on the wool and leave it there until it hardens.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And repeat this several times, and do not stop until the heat of the bite penetrates into the joint and the pain ceases.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	This method of cauterization is called cautery of cows.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter .xii.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	On the cauterization for pain relief.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Some pains in the legs have two causes: either by entrapment or by impact, or by excessive evacuation (diarrhea), and similar causes; due to the infusion of dry or rubbed-in matter, and moist substances.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And cauterization should only be used in this one specific case, which is caused by the infusion of dry or rubbed-in matter.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore, when the leg is swollen, make pills that are similar to its shape and size, which have been made in two places where the pain is; because there will be more tolerance in one line than in another, so that cauterization or more, according to the quantity, should not exceed the swelling.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And make a cauterization with a pointed instrument.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, cauterize with three or four cautery tools, point-wise or medially, according to this form:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter .xiii.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	On cauterization at the beginning of baldness.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	The above text states: "For this type of baldness in small children, and to prevent the beginning of it in children by paying attention to their diet, and by not allowing them to stay too long in the sun."
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And pay attention to the last spine of the leg and the bones that are beginning to stick out from under it.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And when you see this, and if you want to prevent it, then cauterize it with a circular instrument, as shown in the diagram.
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	in such a way that the cauterization covers the entire spine from top to bottom.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you wish, perform cauterization in two or three lines around the spine with a pointed instrument.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	The points should be close to each other.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	Then clean the area where cauterization has been performed with water, as mentioned before.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	However, be aware that cauterization should not be administered for baldness due to nerve spasms.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter .xliv.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	On cauterization for gout and joint pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	Therefore, if gout is caused by rubbing, and if the pains do not improve with rest, then repeat the cauterization.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	This is because you cauterize the excessive evacuation in the circuit of the joint of the foot with pointed cautery.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And make an olive-shaped cauterization, as shown in this diagram:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	If the pains spread to the heels or other joints, and if they become intense, then repeat the cauterization on each heel with three or four cautery tools using the olive-shaped technique described earlier.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	If you find that the number of cauterizations is not sufficient, then perform the aforementioned cauterization and do not apply pressure to your hand during the procedure.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	If the pains spread to the heel and the joint, then administer the cauterization described in the previous chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	If the pains are in both feet, and it is called sugar, then pierce in the circuit of the fire as shown, piercing from one side to the other, and make two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	If the pains remain in the feet, then pierce in the circuit of the fire on each foot and on the heel bone.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	If the pains spread to the sides of the feet or the calves, then cauterize each muscle and tendon on both sides.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And do not evacuate the patient without proper preparation and reception of medicines, for if it is done well, fire will be evacuated with this cauterization and healing will occur, God helps.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter .xlv.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	On cauterization for fractures.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When there is a fracture in the ankles and the bowstrings are loosened in front of the tendon, and if it begins to break - which you should order - then the patient should rest for a while, and he should use soothing means so that the gap does not open in his belly.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	Then keep the patient between your two legs, and order him to lie down so that he does not feel any pain or see any tendon or bowstring.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	Then return to the patient's feet and try to break the bone at the end of the foot, which is similar in shape to a circle, with the split running through the middle.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Then perform the cauterization described in this diagram, which shows the shape:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	And return to the patient's feet, which are warm and have a red color.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	Then place the cautery on that mark with your hand on top of the cautery, straight, and if you can reach the bones of the finger inside the joint of the foot, do so with the point; and again look with another instrument if you have not succeeded in the first one inside the bone.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	And observe wisely the movement of the intestine during the cauterization, that you do not burn that intestine so that on the patient's leg there is no death or other great evil.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And know that when you don't reach the bone with the cauterization, do not continue your operation.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And know that the child’s cauterization is subtle according to its age and size.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	Then clean the place of the cauterization for three days at most before it heals over.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then heal those same as others with cold humors that have healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And the patient should be covered with a blanket over their legs for 10 days at most so that the place and wound are sealed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And know that you should not give food to the patient according to the length of their recovery time; the intestine should not come out before the effort of healing it.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And after 10 days, if they can walk properly and comfortably, let them go; but if not, keep them for another 10 days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And follow a strict regime of exercise and food and drink; and be diligent in this whole therapy so that it will heal completely.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And direct the healing of the ruptures in other parts of the abdomen, and begin it, and want them to stop, then cauterize the rupture with a pointed cautery according to the quantity of the patient; and let that which has come out with the third part of the patient be cured as well; and know that it is not done.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And some say that the first rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this shape, because it is marked by a line:
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	And pause the line that goes down from the edge in the middle above the rupture, and another line on top of it; and leave your hand with a nail-like instrument, but the first cauterization is lighter and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46
De cauterizacio de torcio.	Of Cauterization for Wounds.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When the pain persists in the limbs by encrustation or percussion, and it does not respond to medication, know that you should cauterize with a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And the cauterization of each member according to its size and age, and the virtue and development of it, and the location of the torments and pain in it.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	So if he is healed by the first cauterization, it is good; otherwise, repeat it on him; because usually such pains are caused by punctures in a member adjacent to that part, so that you will be able to heal those with cauterization where the intestine is healed.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47
De cauterizacio de lepra.	Of Cauterization for Leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Leprosy that has been seen to be healed by cauterization is a great remedy, and sparingly if the disease of leprosy is caused by the decay of flame and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And if you want to cauterize that leprosy, consider whether it is caused by the decay of flame and melancholy; and if it is cured with water as we have said in the division and do not change, neither this nor that concerns you, and fear for the patient's whole body and all his limbs that corruption encompasses them; then cauterize that on the head according to the middle place of the head, and on the second one from behind, leaving the forehead at the end of the hair; and both behind the ears; and one behind the neck.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And last, place your hand over the cauterization for a little while so that it does not stick to the bone too much, and if the scabs are moved, so that the exhale of thick vapors is relieved from it; and cauterize on its own according to what is necessary.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if leprosy has spread over the patient's whole body and manifestly so, then know that you should cauterize that on the head as we have said; and on the tip of the nose, and on the two scabs, and on the two nostrils, and on the two holes of the ear, and on the two spondyls of the neck, and on one above the throat, and on one below it, and on the two shoulders, and on the two arms, and on the two palms of the hand, and on the two legs, and on the two feet, and on the tips of the toes; and know that you should cauterize all these joints of his body and his feet, and on the heels of his feet, and on the fists of his hands.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And keep in mind those nerves that are over the bone which you do not burn.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	Some are cauterized with a cautery on the bones of the finger and another on the mouth of the stomach, and one above the anus.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And know that the more you adjust cauterizations, the more it is healed and improved; and know that the patient does not feel pain during cauterization, because his limbs are already numb.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And know that the cauterizations are few or many according to the limbs and joints, depending on what came before with the instruments.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then clean the cauterization with flour that is damp and also with the other cure, as long as it heals.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48
De cauterizacio de stupor.	Of Cauterization for Stupor.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When a member is stiffened or fallen asleep and is not healed with medicine, oils, and plasters; then you should cauterize that stiffened member according to the size of the limb or its age.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And this small cauterization enters into the essence of the contract slightly.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then clean that with soap, as long as it heals.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	Some are cauterized with stupor that extends to the limbs and to the spine; and the nerves that move that limb are also cauterized, and the stupor is repeated.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	More should not be done on it, but what is known in anatomy of limbs and exit of nerves throughout the whole body moving.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 59
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	Of Cauterization for Scabrous Lesions That Are Morphea.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When the scabs are old and do not respond to any medicine; then you should cauterize those with a small cautery according to the quantity of the contract within it so that the whiteness and color of it change, and the color of it is changed.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	Then clean those with flour and lentils, and olive oil colored red, and leaves of yarrow, or a mixture of chamomile; and know that you should pour this over the place, and leave it for a while so that it heals; and if there is any scar left, then wash it off with water.
Capitol .l.	Chapter 60
De cauterizacio de cranc.	Of Cauterization for Cranky Lesions.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When the canker is beginning and you want to make it a crusty wound, then cauterize that with a circular cautery in the middle of the wound and turn it over; and know that if there are any sores or openings in the skin, they should first be cleaned with oil.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And the wise ones said that it should be cauterized with a last cautery in my place; but I don't see this, for I am afraid it is ulcerated, and I have already seen some scabs there.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And it should be put to cauterize in the circuit of him to circle so also we have said, or at most cauterize.
Capitol .li.	Chapter.li.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	On Cauterization for Ablations.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When an ablation is delayed in maturity, and this happens due to the excess fluid gathering, or because of the age of the animal, since it is old and feeble of spirit, or because of time, and you want to speed up the maturation process for ables; then cauterize in the circuit of him at most small points; and leave those alone as they will mature quickly.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	But if you want the piercing of him with cauterization, then this is the form of him that you should ignite; and leave that in my place where it penetrates the ablation.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the cauterization is placed in that place that has been left, so that the whole body of the arm is relieved; and leave that to be healed.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter.lii.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	On Cauterization for Corrosion.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corrodent is ambulant corruption in the member, which corrodes that also as if it were eating dry wood with fire.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore if you ignite cauterization in that place where it suffers from fire, then you should ignite small points of cauterization first, and large ones according to what is convenient in that place where it is corrosive.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And leave cauterize that completely from the beginning to heal all corrosion and not remain any cause of him.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And leave that for three days, and place a damp cloth three times a day mixed with oil on the cauterized places so that the scars are completely healed and all corrosion is eradicated.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And leave that to be healed with moistened meat.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	But if after three days' time the meat is born healthy in which there is no corruption, then it is good; but if not, then repeat the cauterization on that place where it is rotted.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	Corrodent is treated with some herbs by acute medicine, for that is half a place of cauterization.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	But nevertheless cauterization by fire is a lighter cure.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And I have already said the cure of him by acute medicine in the division, and now take that when you have need of it.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter.liiii.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	On Cauterization for Claws and Other Similars.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Some scabs develop in the feet that are called claws, and this is a great cause of trouble, cutting off the foot; and cauterize them according to two methods, if by fire, and if by cold water.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	But cauterization by fire is that you ignite the cauterization of the claw-like appearance as if a bird were flying, which is made of iron according to the quantity that it contains the claw from all parts, and is of fine grain.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	And leave that ignited over the claw, and turn your hand away from the cauterization in the circuit of the claw so that the cauterization reaches the depth of the claw.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	Leave that for three days within which it begins to sizzle the arm.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	And leave that plastered with dried herbs, three times a day, because that will eradicate its roots.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And leave that place to be healed with meat-generating ointment within which it is healed.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	If it does not convert into a claw, and some scabs happen on the surface of the body, mostly on the hands and feet, then know that you treat them with water, and this is because you take a small quantity of oil or iron or bird's feather, and pour a little amount of cold water on it, and cover the claw; and get the water out of your hand, and turn your hand over the water, and squeeze your hand, so that the water falls back onto the edge of the claw; and wait for the patient an hour to taste the water from the edge of the claw because the claw with its roots will erode.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And thus treat those that are in pain due to corruption in all parts of the body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And leave that pus that the roots of claws are eradicated by the water of the ointments with which meat is generated.
Capitol .liiii.	Chapter.liiii.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	On Cauterization for Tremors.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When a tremor is caused by friction in the nerves or by fever of frictive cause, or by similar cause, then know that you treat it with four cauterizations or five on the spine of two, between each spine a cauterization; and one cauterization on the feet, and another on the stomach, and another with olive oil.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And that tremor of his will be relieved, and the speed of its healing will increase.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter.lv.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	On Cauterization for Accidental Wounds in the Body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When in the body there are accidental wounds, and pustules open that are made of gross corrupted matter; then, at first sight when it appears, treat it so that it is cauterized on all sides of the fistula with a fine cauterizing instrument, the end of which is extended by fire; or with a long-cut razor; or with a slow cauterization.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And some scabs are cauterized at the beginning of their discharge according to this method; and they are not crusted, and the excess is removed by them, and they are healed from those.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	But nevertheless, know that water should be forced out with bloodletting.
Capitol lvi.	Chapter lvi.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	On Cauterization for Accident Bloodletting by Cut of Artery.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Too much blood flows from an artery that is cut through the wound of the plague which it was not before, or because of the incision of ables or cauterization of a member, and thus it happens, and it is difficult to recover.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Then, if too much blood flows, then you stop it with your hand at the orifice of the artery, and leave that placed over that place where it happens; and do not let the blood go down from the hole where it came out, and do not allow it to go back.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And leave the fire cauterizations a few small ones and many, by numbers, and exhale over them within which they are ignited.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And take from those a small one or a large one according to the place and the wound in which the artery is broken, and put it into the vein quickly before you can recover your hand, and treat that within which it has been cauterized so that it closes and heals.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the blood is driven out of the orifice of the artery when you release your hand and exhale the cauterization, then take another cauterization by preparing those that were in fire, and now do not allow it to go back.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And guard yourself from burning the nerve here, and let it flow onto another evil.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And know that when blood flows from an artery, then it is not possible to stop the blood, and much more so when the artery is large, if not by four ways: or cauterize as it is said has been done, or extract when it is not extracted, because when it is extracted the extremities of him are burned, and the blood is stopped, and the blood is stopped, or that it be tied with a ligature by a strong tension, or that they are placed on medicines from which their virtue is to stop the blood; and they are tied with a pulvinar with a binding.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	May the one who performs surgery be modest and strict in his dressing and position for burning and similar causes, he will not achieve anything except torture.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	But if here there is no doctor and there is no medicine, then let the wound be cleaned with a sharp tool according to what I have said above, and understand it very well that the wound should not be torn apart from its natural healing process, and on the scar it should not be burned; and if necessary, cauterize or apply medication.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Begin the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Of incisions, puncture wounds, bloodletting, plagues, and their similarities.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are words of Albucasis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have already said in the first chapter all illness where surgery by fire is appropriate and medication that burns, and the occasions and causes of it, and the tools that are necessary with their shapes of the cauterization; and I have ordered the chapters of the superior part of the head within the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And I will proceed in this chapter in this manner for those who want it, so that it may be eased; then on it that they have asked, let them seek relief.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	In front of me, before I begin here, fear, and know that this is for the sake of those who are afraid; it is in the first chapter about cauterization.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And for those who are afraid, they should be very careful, because in the operation described in this chapter there are many ways to lose your life: either by spraying the vein or incision on the abscess or opening of the infection or plague or extraction of an arrow or incision of pain and their similarities.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And from all of these, accompany fear and trembling, and in addition to them, death is imminent.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I warn you that it may fall on you, because some of these ways are due to the actions of evil men that cause diseases in a moment.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And of them is some that goes astray from his own disease and it will be easily overcome; and this because of the suddenness of this disease that finds its cause, and because of the length of this disease, and because of the fear by which death is caused.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And these are those who cause you harm and trouble, wait for that medicine, and their disease is destructive.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And do not consent that this man should come to you in this way; and your caution should be greater than your haste and your greed; and do not presuppose any cause about him unless it is certain knowledge that verifies him as dangerous to you, and to whom the successful result is praiseworthy.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And use in the treatment of all your diseases by prediction and indication of it to the one who brings salvation, because in him you are helped in acquiring fame and memory, praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Or children, God in you inspires understanding and does not entrust direction and protection to you, because it is in him.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have ordered this chapter differently according to the chapters that precede it in the chapter of cauterization, of the cure of the head within the feet, so that it may be eased here for you by what you ask of it and from which you needed relief.
Capitol primier.	First Chapter.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	Of the treatment of water that is contained in the head of children.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	Know that this disease appears in children when their heads are light.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And some appear due to a hidden cause that is not known.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	May I not see this disease in children; and all those whom I have seen die, and for that reason I have observed it in them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I have seen a child whose head was filled with water, and his head remained high until it burst because of the size of his head, and more than the humidity increased within it until the fire of death.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	Or this moisture or is added between the nose and the skull, or is added above the skull over the face.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	Because the operation in that case is if the moisture is between the nose and the skull and the abscess is scarce, then you should cut on the top of the head with a wedge in the shape of a letter V, and let this width run down as long as the humidity runs; and this is the form of the stye:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And if this moisture is increased, and the abscess is larger, then here are two wounds according to this way:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the moisture is above the skull, the sign is that you should open the mouth of the head completely and squeeze the water when you press it with your hand from inside; and do not let it go to your face.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	Then cut in the middle of the head according to this way:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And remove all the moisture from it; and strengthen the fissures with linen and plasters; and pour oil over it from above on the fifth day, and strengthen the head with equal parts of powder; and feed the patient with dry food of little moisture until the member is comfortable and heals.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And it is another way of incision, which you consider appropriate for the size of the abscess and the accumulation of water: some appear in the back of the head or on the sides or left; and therefore be careful with the incision where the abscess appears and the retraction of water, and cut as much as possible.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that you do not cut the artery and give fluid flow from blood and pain in the disease by this flow of water.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter II.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	Of incision of the arteries which are close to the ears, called hairlines.
Capitol segon.	Second Chapter.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When it comes to the catarrh or the air passages in the foot, and it is old, and you have not treated it with medicines, then the last cure for this disease is incision of those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And therefore, when you want to incision those that the disease grinds the head, and cut the area with sharp linen threads so that it does not break out again; and consider how the vein is pulsated; and the places of each on the places that are close to the ears, and in some people they are hidden.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And consider cutting each with the stye and cutting each according to a wedge that reaches up from the skull, and it is for the length of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you want, insert the stye between the artery and cut it with the incision above the junction.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And the length of the incision should be two fingers wide, because when any vein is incised, the pulse will be fast and irregular, which might burst it if done frequently.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	May the stye not be felt; then measure from the ear the amount of space for three fingers, and consider cutting it; and go into the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And here you will find the quantity of water that is one inch: and strengthen it with a strong food of more than half, and this is the second quantity that appears from the virtue of the disease and the retraction of the artery.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And consider the plague, and if there is any cause of a stye, then cut it so that it does not give a pimple.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen the pulse with plums and drape it in a cloth, and then treat that with ointment until it is cured.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	On the Extraction of Arrows That Are Embedded in the Body.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When an old or catarrhal fever attacks the body due to herbal infusions and the quality of the air in the temple, or when it is violent and similar to those, and is treated with medical cures, and does not yield, then we have undertaken to deal with these ailments by extracting arrows from the body, or by cauterization of those, as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the manner of the operation and extraction of those is that the patient should shave the hair from the place where they are; and understand this, because it is hidden unless shown by the pulse, and is only evident in a few men by their velocity.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden from you, then strengthen the pulse of the patient with some cloth; and then rub the place with a rough cloth or evaporate the place with water until the arrow appears manifestly.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	Then take this spit, whose form is as follows:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then take the spike with ease until you reach the arrow; and then put it in the joint and extract that from the spike, discovering that of the tunics which are left there, completely.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	Perhaps if the artery is thin, then wrap that with the end of the spike, and then cut off a portion of it according to the amount by which the ends of it are lengthened and contract, and there will be no flow of blood, because if they are not cut off, all the blood would flow.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	Then remove the flesh from the joint. Within three.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	If the arrow is large, then cover it with two pieces of twine or rope of linen, and do not let it touch the pus in front of the consolidation of the pulse, lest there be a flow of blood.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	Then cut off the superfluity which is between two plasters; and let it be at that hour or at another hour.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you wish, cauterize that with cauterizing iron within the bone by a cutting weapon, so that the ends of it are incised, and set in place that work of the joint.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And the best work is either if the patient has fever or if it is a complex of burning; because cauterization helps to end the humors, and therefore it is better in healing.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	Then remove the arrows that hurt the place of the old cot, and let them rest on a fine dust, and then treat with dry medicines so that the flesh heals and the blood stops, until it is cured.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if while you are operating another is caused to flow blood from the arrow, then stop that flow of blood, or with cauterization, or by covering the place of the cot, and strengthen your hand so that it does not stop the blood.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if for some reason that is not presented to you, then pause the work on the place until the blood stops, and dip it in very cold water until the pain returns, and strengthen it according to what has been said.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And the place where pus is extracted from an arrow is that you cauterize the vein with this cauterizing weapon, having set two cotter pins, because you have marked the two places with thread, and pause every so often, lighting it, until it reaches the bone and cuts the vein in two places, so that blood can be lengthened between the ends of it, because it is not consolidated by this cauterization.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	This is the form of the cauterizing weapon:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	The acute ends of the two pins.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	However, if they are small acute ends, two pins are better, because if they are sharp with two pins it will be appropriate to cut the flesh quickly, and do not cut it with one.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore, in those where there is some thickness, the heat of the fire should be held in them, and the flesh is cut easily.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	This work is better than any work, and the pus is lighter.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	Is the space between two pins the quantity of the thickness of the thread.
Capitol quart.	Chapter IV.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	On the Treatment of Acid Tears and Whealing in the Eyes.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When acid tears are caused, and the course of those veins that run over the forehead defores, and does not yield to any cure with medicine, and often the face of the patient becomes red and wrinkled because of the acidity of the tears, and the eyelids are scratched by their sharpness, let them undergo this operation, and do not delay in treating those with space between the eyelids, and let them not be too large, because the eyelids might touch each other.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And it is that you command the patient to shave the hair from his forehead, and then cut three slits in the forehead evenly spaced according to the length of his brow.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the slit falls two fingers: the first slit is evenly distant from the tip of the nose to the middle of the forehead, and the second slit is according to the length of a finger's width from the first, and the third from the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And guard against the incision of arrows that are in two places, and strengthen your hand from the continuation of both jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space between each incision is three fingers' width.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a roll of sponge or dry cloth, which you use to extract the blood.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	Then take two sharp extremities of the spit, whose form is as follows:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	is to the incision between the temple and the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Then extract all the cartilage between two incisions, which is above the bone, and then extract the middle portion of it before making the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	Then take this spit and enter it into the first incision or another instrument called a knife, taking from one side and not taking from the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	Then pause the latz of that meat just next to the cartilage, and then cut away from the bone, and let them fall by the way they reach the middle slit, and cut off all vessels that descend from the head to the eyes.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	However, if the incision is continued until it reaches the cartilage, and then extract it from the middle slit until the other slit.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	Then, when blood flows from a certain quantity of the incision, squeeze the places where the blood is clotted.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	Then pause in each slit a small cotter pin, and pause on those fine dusts which are wetted with wine and oil and vinegar, and do not let them cause a fever.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	Then on the third day remove that joint and administer a great infusion of cold water, and then treat it with oil of rose and other oils within that the sweats are healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter V.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	On the Treatment of Tears by Catarrh, and to the eyes that descend from the openings inside the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When an old or catarrhal fever attacks the body and often the eyes of the patient become very swollen and red, and the eyelids are sore and blistered, and there is a sharp pain in the forehead due to the opening of small veins inside the head. Then know that these accidents often come from the catarrh, which does not come from the nose but from the openings inside the head.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	Here is the translation of the text:
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Here is the translation of the text:
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then apply dusts infested with vinegar and oil that they do not develop a puss clot without cautery.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when the water has evaporated and the puss has decreased, then cover that area with a paste that does not irritate the flesh; then prepare a paste made of two parts of flour and four parts of colophony and mix it well, and administer this paste to these areas on the native skin.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	On the Treatment of Water that Comes out in the Ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	All causes of water coming out in the ears are of four kinds: either it is mineral, resembling a mineral, as iron and lead; or plant-related, resembling celery or beans; or fluid-like, resembling water and vinegar; or caused by an animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And so when mineral water comes out in the ear or a similar cause to those causes mentioned above does not correspond with ear discharge, and you raise the ear to the sun, and if the water comes out again, then distil that water from violet oil or vinegar, and administer the extract to him, and make him sneeze with a stimulus, and put the sneezes in a vessel near the arrival of the sneeze.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And then place some pieces of cloth or wool around the ear, and extend the ear towards the sun, because motley-colored ears are usually caused by these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not caused, then administer the extract to him with the instrument called subtle epiciarious, whose form is this:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	If it is caused by the gesture, it is good; otherwise, administer the extract to him with a handful of subtle double-cooked rice.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And so if it is not caused by water, then make a tube of aram (a flexible material); insert the end of the tube into the canal of the ear and seal its environment with wax and soft oil so that it does not leak through the tube but remains inside.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And then extract it with a strong suction, because three colored ears are usually caused by water that we have mentioned.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	May be if it is not caused by this method, then take a handful of aluminum foil or old cloth, and place a small amount on the tip of the ear, and wrap it gently around.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And then insert that into the canal of the ear with ease, and dry out the ear of its moisture.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And so if it is not caused by all the causes that we have mentioned, then you must cut off what has developed before it develops into a puss clot or spasm.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the way to cut that off is this: that you command the patient from the phallic vein and extract it by the virtue of water, and then make a crack between your fingers at the root of the ear, and turn the ear towards the sun.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And if the water goes into that crack, and when it is stuck, stop it with an appropriate tool; and then seal the crack tightly, and cure that within which it may be healed.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause of pain in the ear is one of the greases that grow and inflate, then administer the cure and extract it; but if it does not obey you and continues to increase, then take a handful of subtle tea according to this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	And administer to him the absolution of that grease that has fallen into the ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	Do not pass water when you think that ear has already been moistened by the vapor of the ear; and then hold it in small balls, and extract those out with the ones or with subtle gesture, or by absolution as we have said above, for it is relieved by extracting it.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	May be in the water that enters into the ear, it is good to use a stimulus at the beginning, and fill his own ear with a small amount of salt, and beat it over that ear; and if by water it has been caused, it is good; otherwise, then take two small peasy beans, and burn them slightly, and those beans in fire, and put one on the tip of the ear that has the pain, and another on the other ear, and make him jump a little with a slight blow on the back.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Then do not pass water until all the water has been discharged.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc .i., e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And when the water is discharged, then you take paper or a piece of cloth, and put it in the ear with your fingers. And then place one end of it in the ear and extend the other end towards the fire until it burns, so that there is no more smoke from it.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And then put another piece of cloth and make water run through it as many times as necessary until all the water is discharged, and insert that tube with the water-removing instrument.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	May be if the cause of water enters into that ear, if it is a small thing, then put it in his mouth and remove it, cure that with what we have said above; but if it is a large thing causing pain to the head, then administer the extract with a gesture and with a hand, and this cause is lighter than all other causes of water that come out in the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	May be if the cause of water comes out in the ear, when you cure that with water we have mentioned above and in the distillation treatment, and do not remember your cure, then cover that ear to the sun.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And so if any of these causes of worms appear, then extract it with a tube or a thin cloth; but if no cause appears, then take a narrow and long tube whose form is this:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And then insert the small end into the ear according to the quantity that it suffers pain, and extract it with a strong suction, and make water run as drops within, so that all the worms are discharged.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	And if you do not obey what I have said above about feeling the ear, then you cover it with wax as we mentioned; and then administer distillation to those who have already been distilled in the treatment of worms, and extract water in the distillation treatment.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is how you pour the medicinal oils into the ear with this instrument, whose form is this:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	Make it long and thin, in a shape of silver or brass, and make a small crack at the top.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And so that is what you use to fill it with oil that needs to be filled here:
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you want, then take the ray and wrap it gently around the end; pour oil into the cavity of the ear, or juice from any herb, or water that you want of these medicines in the tube — and that is inside the ear –, and then place the ray on top with a slight compression, so that the oil is expelled into the cavity of the ear where it feels the pain, and the patient feels the oil inside.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And so that it is enfused in the ear, it is already cut with fire a little.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And watch that the cause that you will distill in the ear is not too dry, because medicines for the ear do not tolerate it.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter .vii.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	Of the treatment of ear aching.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Some women who are pregnant may have perforations in their ears, and this can sometimes lead to infection in the ear due to a plug of wax or flesh in that area; and this type of infection sometimes occurs in men, especially at the tip of the tray of the ear, which does not allow for drainage, and in some cases it occurs on the outside.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And that which happens in the tray of them, which does not allow for drainage, is in most difficult conditions of healing.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in that where you can get drainage, cover the ear of the patient with oil and look at it.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if there is any discharge, open it with a sharp point, which is the way to do it:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the tip of them is small in length, in which one side is sharp and the other is not; and the blade is of two edges so that it does not hurt the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And if the infection is caused by hidden flesh in the ear or in the meat of them; then you should cut it with a sharp knife and cut it quickly until all the flesh is removed.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the infection is in the tray of the ear; then take a sharp blade and scorch it slightly, and put that into the meat of the ear.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And if you have any discharge with water that the patient may be able to hear with ease, apply pressure to it with ease; and watch out so as not to damage the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And place a strip of the second quantity of the tray in which you have wrapped yourself in Egyptian ointment on the ear; and let it sit for a few days until you are sure that the infection is consolidated, or take some and spread it on thorns and spray it on the skin; and if the ear has already been pus-filled, then watch what you do, and change the poultice with another that you will wrap in ointment made to be oiled with rosewater, so that the pus can come out; and promptly treat it so that it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	If there is any pain, then dip a sponge or cloth in water and put it on the ear, and use the other treatment that you will squeeze with pressure the flow of pain; which is spoken about in the book of distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter .viii.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	Of the treatment of aching eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	And those that are caused by cold in the eyelids; some of them are dry and some of them are wet.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	And if you have any that are dry or slimy, and cut them with a sharp blade on the sides of their hairs; and place them over the affected areas with thorns.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	If there is any pain that comes from the veins, then you should cauterize those with fire in a small dish.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best way to do it is with a sharp blade and when those return at any time there is still a cause of their hairs; and when they are burned, those hairs are destroyed and do not come back again.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter  .ix.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Treatment of aching eyelids in men.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Some cases of aching eyelids in men are caused by something that is gathered in the area that makes it stronger and more durable, and thus becomes larger; which is called "gout".
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	It is the accumulation of thick moisture on the eyelid below and above.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Then the treatment of it is that you should consider if the swelling is caused by something in the eye itself, which makes it greater and more painful; and the cause of it is not known.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Then cut it from the front with a sharp blade and scrape it completely from all sides; then take a sharp point and scrape that which is caused by it; and if it does not stop, return to scrape it again.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	If you have not been able to stop it by applying pressure or cutting it slightly; then do not try to push anything into the eyelid with a sharp point; and if that does not work, then do not try to push anything into it.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the swelling is great, then you should join it with a suture; and treat it until it is healed.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is little, do not worry about that area because the blood of the eye restores it and heals it.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the swelling is declining towards the inside of the eyelid; then let it fall and suspend the swelling with a point; otherwise, you will cut it again; and if the eyelid falls by cutting it, do not try to stop it from falling.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	Then wash the eye with salty water; and treat the area with water that heals until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter .x.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	Of the treatment of aching eyelids in men.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	It is caused by something that is generated in the eyelids above, and it mostly affects children, and its treatment consists of wiping out what has been formed with water; and they cannot see clearly because their tears run down because of the pain.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And so if you keep your eyes on the faces of others all the time, and on the faces of others while they sleep; and if the eyebrows are wet with tears, which are covered by a swelling, and the presence of what seems to be a small lump appears in the eye; and when you touch the area with your finger, you feel something hard; and if you press it lightly, you can feel something below that; then you should know that it is on the eyelid above.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And there is no way to operate it when the patient puts his head on the tray; and place a strip of linen on it, and let it sit for a little while; then place that which comes out of the eye onto the area with your fingers, so that it hardens slightly; and then press the area gently so that it does not break; then place the circle on the eye that contains arnica from all sides; and then put the strip back over the eye, and close it up in the middle of the circle, and open it again after a little while so that the moisture hardens slightly; and then close it again.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	And if the eyelid is closed, then cut it completely from all sides; for in most cases you will find arnica by cutting a small opening; because in some cases arnica comes out with the way it is formed, and this can be done with a sharp blade.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Then remove that which has been formed from the eye with a sharp blade, cutting it at the front and back; and then cut it on the sides and roll it between your thumb and index finger until it is completely removed.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And watch out so that you do not put pressure on the area, so that the blade does not go into the eye and cut it; and if you want to use a sharp object, be careful not to put any pressure on the area.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	If you do not find arnica at the beginning of the crack, then instead of pressing it, put a little water on it and then cut it with a sharp blade; and if you want to use a sharp object, be careful not to put any pressure on the area; and then remove that which has been formed by cutting it from the front and back, and rolling it between your fingers.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And if they grind salt and put it on the area; then cut a little from the front and back, and roll it between your fingers until the moisture comes out of it.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And so treat whatever is inside that needs to be healed.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	Or if blood comes out in the area, then treat whatever is inside that has become bloated and needs to be healed.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter .
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	Of methods of treating the body.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When the eyelids of the body are torn by the natural adjustment and are aged, then treat them to the fire and cause tears and moisture on the eyelids and membrane within, which is the cause of destruction of the eye, called the burning of the eye, and treat in four ways: either with a hot cautery; or with sharp medicine according to what was said in the chapter of cauterization; or it is made by cutting and sewing; or with canes according to what it sees.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And so place the top of the patient's head in your left hand; then turn the eyelid of the eye toward you, and if it turns, good; and if not, insert a needle into that part from which the hair grows at the edge of the eyelid, and make the needle enter at that point -- close to the edge of the eyelid where there are no hairs -- close to the hairs, and pull the thread back through the eyelid, and turn that back toward the eye.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	Then turn inside the edge of the eyelid toward the hair that is adjusted with a pointed needle that pierces the lacrimal major within the lacrimal minor; then pull out the thread and leave it hanging on the edge of the eyelid with a small knot or cloth, and so turn the eyelid toward you with a touch, and let it be like this with the shape of an owl.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	But if it is that the shape is according to the amount of swelling of the eyelid, because there are different people, for those whose eyelids are swollen in a large amount, according to which they are swollen, then treat them differently.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	Then turn on the two lines that you have drawn, and begin from the lacrimal major within the lacrimal minor.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your hairline is close to the natural hair, then treat it like this with the shape of an owl.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	Then place the needle in one of the corners of the eye, and scrape it all out, and adjust the two lips together with a thin thread or hair, and wipe off the blood, and let whatever is superfluous on the eyebrows adhere to them for several reasons that may cause trouble, if you want to do so, and if not, do not.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	Then leave the thread attached inside for three or four days, and then treat whatever is inside it.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you want to, then leave the swelling unsewn, and treat whatever is dry and contracted, because the eyelid becomes red due to the seal of the swelling and the accumulation of it; but unsewing is better. And so say that the ancient remedies of taxes are.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	But if it is a sore place on the body, then it is an operation of good and not fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And there is another way of applying it, and that is to turn the eyelid toward you in this shape, and then raise the eyelid with three separate and gathered needles according to this form:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	If this is not possible there, take a needle with thread, and insert that into the middle of the figure, and another needle according to prop the lacrimal major, and the second prop the lacrimal minor, and adjust the two needles between them with equality, and then lift up your hand with an upward movement, and raise all the eye above which is turned on this, and so treat it.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then adjust the two lips of the swelling together with a suture, and treat whatever is inside that needs to be healed.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	If this happens again with your incision or cut, then treat it with cerates and similar things, and anoint.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And in some cases the hair of the eyelid changes when you use it for incision, so then treat it with a needle; but the suture is more artificial.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	The treatment with canes is according to this form:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	is that you turn the eyelid and separate the shape according to what I have said; then make two canes or two thin needles, whose length is according to the length of the eyelid and whose width is smaller than the width of the line.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have already cut at the ends of some parts, where you have the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Then add each one to what is superfluous on the eyelid of the eye with a slight thickness, and tighten the canes of each part together, and leave that for several days, because the eyelid will die and rot if it is tightened too much.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	And if there is a delay, then break off the thread with tweezers, and then treat whatever is inside that needs to be healed.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	Then when it is set in stone, the eyelid is raised and the hair does not stick out.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the form of two canes that you will make according to this form:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	the amount of its length and width neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter .
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	Of raising hair that is painful on the body with a needle when the hair is stiff.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When the hair is not natural and stiff and sharp on the body, then the operation in it is that you take a very thin needle and place it in the hair at the edge of the skin, and so adjust the ends of it and do not touch any part of it with your hand in a gentle way.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	Let the length of the thread be according to the amount of a palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	Then put another very thin needle on it in a moment, and trim the ends of that thread if you want to.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	Then place the head of the patient in your left hand, and so place it near to the sun, that your work is seen, because it is a delicate operation and small.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	Then insert the needle into the root of the hair adjusted with a need for extraction, and let it penetrate quickly into the eyelid before you pull out that natural hair.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	Then pull out the hair from inside and insert it in a little hole, and let the hair be one, two, or three, and not more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	Then take your hand away from that place where the hair was extracted with a hole in the eyelid with the natural hair.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	If the hair is extracted with a hole and not taken out, then take it out by cutting the ends together with a needle that you have made for that purpose, within which the hair was taken out with a hole on top of the eyelid with natural hair.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	Then let that hair be cut by vision of the eye, because then you will take it out with a needle, and each one will close its wound, and leave those closed for two or three days, so that the hair remains attached to its place and grows on top of that.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	If the hair is too long, then adjust a very long hair of the natural hair, and so raise it up to that, or what you leave within that is extended, and then raise that.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter 13.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	Of the treatment of a certain problem that is seen in the eyelid above.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When the problem is seen in the eye, and it is contracted by the eyelid that is contracted within itself, or to the right or left side by poor consolidation of the swelling, or by section or cauterization, and so treat it with consolidation of the swelling, or by section or cauterization, or by similar things to its malady.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Here is the translation of the text:
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	Do not use the cure of the patient from these causes that dry out, for if you do so, you will return with poison that is worse than nothing and will not help at all;
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use the cure of fenugrec for those causes that soften, and dip it in water where there are ashes and salt from it, or prepare aquilex oil, which is liquefied by some of the oils, and immerse the pad in it, and apply it with that.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the treasure of your cure is that you pierce all those parts that are not consolidated according to the form that they were at the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation which we have mentioned is nothing but a correction of the poison that does not return the form of the place according to what it was before.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	Of the cure of poison that is made in the eyelid.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This poison, which is made in the eyelid, which is called with reason poison; and it is of two kinds, either natural or accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	The accidental is made by plague or by a wound or by cautery or by other similar causes.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	And the way of performing this operation is that you take a needle that makes a double thread, and insert it into the flesh, and let it pass from the lacrimal bone on the left side within the lacrimal bone on the right, so that the thread reaches the two extremities of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	Then return the flesh to its place with the needle and cut it with the blade widely.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And if the figure of the eyelid returns as it was before, it is well; and if not, take the thread and pause it in the divided figure, and at that turn the eyelid, and make the two folds on the edge of the eyelid below.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	The extremities of the two folds should be at two angles with the incision, which you have made so that they meet, and may form a figure with them.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is a Greek letter: Lambda.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	Then return the flesh to its place with the amount that is the width of it taken from below the eyelid, so that it closes the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	Then adjust the separated parts and sew them together with a thread of wool; and then cure those with water that we have mentioned to be mollifying and to be made inside so that they are healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if the poison enters by a wound or a suture or cauterization, then it is customarily said that you open a flat wound on the hair of the eyelid according to what precedes.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	Then separate the crease between the two lips according to what we have mentioned.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the summary of the speech of the cure of poison when it is dried up or wet, that it run in this operation according to how it is prepared in the form of poison, and that it is in a form of drops.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the master of the art prepares all the time poison in any way possible so that it returns the figure to the natural form, or similar to it, and the patient according to what is convenient for the operation and the instruments in the best dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	Of the attachment of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation happens in men of age who is solid the eyelid above the flesh of the eye, and is forbidden by the ease of movement and its natural works, then it is customarily said that you insert the tip of the needle into the edge of the eyelid, and raise it up, or extend it with a thread.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	Then you cut the attachment with a sharp blade, which is not on the edge of the incision, keeping out a little so that the patient is not disturbed by the operation, and leaving the blade that does not damage the flesh according to its sharpness.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And be your incision that easily removes that attachment so that it is returned the eyelid according to its natural form, and all the attachment is healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	Then you put in the flesh salty water that you wash it with; or distill it in the water of Zuni by dissolving it in water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	Then separate between the eyelid and the flesh with a crease, and place on the flesh wool infused with album of wine, and then third day use causes of consolidation so that it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	Of incision in the eyelid and prominence of flesh of the lacrimal bones.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Know that the eyelid is according to two ways, because it either is nervous, and is similar to hard cyphers subtile; or is not-nervous, similar to frozen white humidity, which when it touches a thread, or is forced to take a knot, is separated and the thread does not remain in it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both of them do not start from the lacrimal bone major that goes little by little until it covers the eye, and prohibits the light and the movement of flesh.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	And the way of working in the incision is that the patient pauses his head on the table, and opens the eyelids, and raises the eyelid to your hand, and collects the eyelid with a few drops of thread and double it, and extend those from the eyelids.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	Then take a needle and insert it into that hair of the eyelid or of the cow or of the water, or of similar things, or of faithful leather, or double the extremity of the needle little by little and leave that in the middle of the eyelid, and pierce it with the needle, and tie the eyelid by that thread; and extend those from the eyelids, and cut off that hair at the edge of the eyelid that covers the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And then you keep that hair within the back of it.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	Then you cut the hair in the root of the lacrimal with a sharp blade or with small scissors, and let the flesh of the natural lacrimal fall so that by cutting it does not produce continuous flowing of tears.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And sometimes the eyelid is extended with solid oil or with leather, as we have mentioned, and then it is separated with a sharp blade of the form of it:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And keep in mind that you do not touch the corneal membrane with the blade and that the hole is made in the rupture, and the pupil is punctured.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Then the incision produces in the flesh a little salt taste or of pepper that does not hurt, and leaves it within the other day; and then you cure that with water that covers so that it is healed.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the eyelid is not nervous and you cannot put in it the needle, or does not remain attached to it, then this special kind of eyelid is cured with medicine, and is healed in this way by eye and prescribed in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to separate that eyelid, then you open the patient's eye and take a blade sharp according to this form:
am subtilitat.	with subtlety.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if the hair of that eyelid is rarefied and is attached to it, then you distill it from your oil in the water of pepper or of salt, and dry it within the other day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And repeat this operation until you have fully removed the whole of it from him, or else the opposite will happen to you: let cautery be applied to the wound because, when you leave it, it will start to suppurate and will not heal at the beginning.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And repeat your operation on that with reason until it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The importance of the lacrimal gland, if it does not cause great damage to him, should be suspended with a knife; and cut off one side of it, and do not finish cutting it so that it does not bleed.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And distill in the lacrimal chief oil and make it into an ointment until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	Of the incision of someone who has a sore on his leg.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Some veins in the eyelids of a person are born flesh that covers the pupil, or come closer together above the eyelid or move towards the eyebrows and press them together at the top; and is joined to the flesh with a rope-like thread.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	May the operation on him be such that the patient does not move his head: and open those veins with a knife or a forceps; and cut off the flesh at the beginning until it is all finished with the scissors, and keep the leg still after you have done so; and do not hurt that person in any way during your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And be your incision the one that you cut those or with a spatulum which we have mentioned in the incision of the hand, or with small forceps which are gathered together according to the shape of it: proceed as is appropriate for this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Therefore, when your incision is finished and all that flesh has been removed, then fill the leg with salt powder, or distill in it a red powder resembling that of the corrosive medicines, and place it over the leg, or cover it with a poultice, within which let it be secured by cautery so that it does not suppurate.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if there is any cause of the sore being infected, and you are afraid of suppuration, then leave that leg alone and heal that suppuration with water, which will remove it, and repeat your operation on that until it is healed, and make an incision in the flesh that forms on the leg of this kind.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	But in the meantime, keep yourself away from any cure of the leg by natural or accidental means, and work with iron, and do not put your hand on any of these operations until you see that the member is suitable for such an operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVII.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	Of the Incision of the Leg.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	There are some veins that run over the leg and prevent you from performing surgery on it; and if they break out, they cause a sore.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore it is necessary at the beginning that you consider whether the leg in which there is a sore is strong and does not have any other disease than the sore itself; then collect that sore.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And tell the patient to keep his head still, and suspend those veins with a knife or with two; and let that knife be doubled in length according to this form:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or two knives, graduating them in a way according to this form:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And let those veins be collected with sutures, carefully, and abstain from washing that sore for an hour or two, until those veins have been removed from the leg and are bleeding.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And keep the leg away from the sun's heat; and if your operation is in the morning before the sun rises, and be firm in your operation so that you do not cut into any of those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have finished, then distill in the leg chief oil or green oil so that it may be cut with acute corrosive water which has been removed from the sore.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	But if you cannot collect all of it in that hour, then distill as much as you can; and leave it alone for a few days, until the pain has subsided, and is secured against suppuration by cautery.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And repeat this operation on him in the same way again until he is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	This is the shape of the forceps:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	Of Reduction of Nasal Congestion.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you treat congestion with cautery or with acute medicinal means according to the preceding narration and it is not healed, then do not cut into it but rather extract all the moisture that is in it and the powder which is within it until it is uncovered the bone.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then, when the bone is exposed and covered with corrosion or blackness, then cut it with this instrument whose form is as follows:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	It is called a sharp cap, and made of iron, and shaped like this, which is done with a point of a file or with a point of a soft metal made by a point of a lime (shaped like this: [a triangular shape]).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And place that above the infected part of the bone, and turn it from side to side, and press your hand little by little until you know that that corruption is smooth.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	The water should be made hot sometimes, and restore the place with dry andstringent means.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	Then if the place is consolidated and has good flesh hidden in it, and the bones of the sine are separated and it is not renewed and does not suppurate and does not happen to it again during the ten days, then you will know that it is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	Except that you should not cut into it again but rather reduce the fracture to the shape of the nose, and according to this method: and if you discover another bone with iron or acute medicine, and after uncovering the bone, then cut it according to this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	The extremity of the iron triangle, and the base of it should be first weakened within the edge in such a way:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	And repeat this operation on the bone, and place that above the lacrimal; and extend your hand a little of the leg, and turn your hand from side to side until it penetrates the whole bone, and then feel the patient's pulse as you turn your hand:
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Then restore that place with drystringent medicines, scraping it sometimes: and if you are not satisfied, then add some more.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Then if the flesh does not endure at that place, then the matter which stops up the passage returns to the nose, and after it has been made hot, then water should be poured on the patient' nose.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	Of Reduction of the Emphasis of the Leg.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the leg swells to its full extent and does not decrease or increase, then loosen the patient' hand, and then repeat this operation, and then apply air to the throat as a sacrifice and sucking for good sucking; and place a plaster on the leg with a little powder of acacia, and tighten it:
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	The manner of the powder is that you take sheets of lion' skin, and each sheet be doubled into four; and make those pieces of powder.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And place those together according to the quantity which the leg requires.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And tighten those together with a strong tie; and repeat the air as a sacrifice; and then stop the air, leaving it alone for a day or two, and then wash the leg.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	But if in the meantime the ligament becomes soft, then keep it strict.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And now bring back the limb close to the day and night as we have said before.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if the hernia has already been reduced, then so it is, and otherwise, repeat the poultice with the dust, contraction, and vacuums within until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter .xxi.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	About the incision of the eminence of the tunic.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When there is an eruption in the tunic of the eye, and the eminence is raised and the palpebras are removed in this way as with a grain of raspings, and the shape of a man is formed by it, and you want to cut it, then do the operation as we have said before that you enter the needle into the root of the eyelid on the side of the lacrimal, and let it go in; and then make the needle penetrate and leave the first one according to its disposition; and then cut the place of the double string and bring back the eyelid by the circuit of the needle, and strengthen that.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	And now remove the needle and place it on the hernia with wool infused with milk of lead and let it remain that way until it is healed.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And now cure the hernia by applying the ointment as we have said before so that the plague is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And in some cases all the parts of the hernia are gathered together by a circle of cloth around the hernia, and it is pierced with a fine needle that enters into the hernia proper, and runs the serous pus, and falls down the hernia and goes in.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And now strengthen it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De curacio de alconati.	About the treatment of eye injuries.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This evil which is called alconati is nothing more than a disease that is gathered in the hernia resembling falling water and not that one.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	The way to work with it is that you place the hernia under the blade and set it in two places and do not allow it to come down; let the light be held back and the hernia be examined as above.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	If it does not go down, you know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	But if the preparation for the descent of the hernia with milk that we have said before is not done, then make the hernia under the blade between your hands and take a fine needle and pierce it on that part next to the conjunctiva in the cornea in the crown (in the place where it is visible), so that the hernia comes out.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	So if it is taken out then you pour on the hernia milk mixed with honey or water in which you have already prepared fenugrec and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And now be cured of other causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 23.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	Of the treatment of falling water from the hernia.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already mentioned the spices of the water in the division and what is suitable to pierce with the needle, then according to the health.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Then it will be seen that you make the hernia under the blade on a board and tie the hernia to one side with a string, keeping it firm.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And then place it near the eyelid of the hernia on your left side if the water is in the left hernia; or to your right side if the water is in the right hernia.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And then to your right side take the water, if the hernia is on the left; or to your left side if the hernia is on the right.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And then place the edge of the water near the crown by the thickness of the blade in the album of the hernia on the side of the lacrimal, and then pour the water with virtue and twist it around your body at that point.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And then pour the water into the album of the hernia and feel that the water has already reached the cause in the eye.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And then the measurement of the path of the water to the hernia is the same as the measurement of the space from the pupil to the end of the iris, and that is the crown of the hernia; because you will see with the eye through the clarity of the corneal layer.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And then place the water in that place where it is needed; and then put another needle in a different place and then if the water falls after a while, then you will see with it soon afterwards.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And then wait a little; if the water goes down, then you stop for a while before pouring out that other one before the hernia comes out.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And then when it is stopped and not going down, you pour out almagda with ease, and turn it around a little at a time, and dissolve in the water some clear salt of the gem and wash the hernia from within; and then pause outside the hernia by a thread or stop or wool infused with rosin and milk of lead and bind it to the hernia.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	But we will not go back to those times when they paused over it with a knife.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if you do not obey your almagda to the instrument of the hernia for its hardness, because it is some of those people whose hernia is hard; there are two ways that can be done: one way is to cut it with a knife; and another is to rub it with oil.
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And therefore, pierce that joint, and do not lift your hand away from the wound, and you will not miss a small spot in the palm of your hand.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	Then put on the salve as I have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And you should pay a compliment to the work, be prepared for the patient's sleep by making it comfortable on his back in a dark room, and prohibit any movement.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	Then remove from him the liquid so that it is dry, and do not touch his head to the right or left.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And put on the ligature according to its disposition within the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	Then remove it from that dark room and examine the wound carefully, then return the ligature within a day. vii.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And do not cover that you should not pour water in the hour of the cure or so often apply the infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	While covering, do not move water away from you because water does not move well and quickly by sight.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	However, if a fever occurs, then cover up after the seventh day, and correct that joint with water so that the fever subsides.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Then wash him and place his face upward so that the wind reaches him from above for a few days, he is in the dark room.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And put on the garment with care and speak about its causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And you know that in a closed room one cannot excuse oneself from seeing someone, and then you will be daring about the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And we have already heard from some of those who are in the Art of Healing, and some said that fire is made in Air by piercing it with a needle and letting water out.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	However, in our country, there was no perfect water, and water is not found in any of the ancient books; it may be new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	These are the forms of the medicines by which they work on those who do not know them:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	They are made from iron or steel themselves, and these sharp tips form this triangular shape, and the sharp tip is like this in form.
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter .XXIV.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	Of the cure for meat in the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When in the nose various kinds of meat are embedded that have a cause put together by the movement of the feet or by pollen, and this disease is called polyps because it resembles that of a bee stung.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And from him is the cancerous meat, the lung, of black color; and from him is the lion's meat, not of black color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Then in those lion meats that are not fraudulent or cancerous, cover up the patient' side and place it under the sun, and open the navel of him, and pierce the navel with a needle.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	Then remove it from the sides, and cut off with a sharp knife that has been taken from one of the parts, within which you know all the meat has been eaten; if there is any possibility that he will lose his life because of some cause, then you should cut him off easily from him.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	Then if a fever occurs after the cure or so often apply the infusion, then cover him up with water; or if it is from malicious pustules, then put on and cauterize that part within which has been cut off completely and all the cavities have been filled.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	Then remove with a sharp knife in the nose near the edge of the vein and water or vinegar.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	Then if the nose bleeds and you see moisture inside the palate, then know that it is already healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	Then if the moisture does not penetrate further because it is covered up, then know that within him is no meat in the upper nostrils to which absession has not been achieved.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Then cover up tightly the flesh that has any thickness, and taste it with the tongue, and place between each nut the amount of the said water or juice, and put on the meat and insert an end of the flesh into the nose by the hair or by another cause that is possible.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And then water will be made to taste, and its odor will reach the nostrils through which it penetrates into the channels of the nose, and be thrown over his scalp, because ten children seem to have this cause at school, and it is a good reason for doing so.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	Then place the two extremities of the flesh, one that comes out on the nose and the other that is wrapped in the nose, and place the needle in the meat between the nuts, and make it cut off within which you know that the meat has already been eaten by the nuts.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	Then remove the flesh, and place in the nose near the edge of the vein a little piece, and make it cut off within three days or more within which it is inflamed all over the meat.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	Then at the end of the cause, place in the nose a tube of lead for drainage during the day within which it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	Then if you are familiar with the cure that has been described, use that.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the device for cleaning the nose maker that distilled oils and medicines are distilled in the nose:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	Make it of silver or steel, which looks like a small open lantern, so that the meat resembles.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	If you want, make a closed tube like this with a cane, and the tube of the cleaning device should be flat, open; which is to hold it by its tail, so that you hold it when you pour oil or water that you want from the sucks and from the causes of disease.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And these are expensive ingredients: honey of beaver, white balm, gingerbreed, and pips of saffron, long pepper, escargot of spicing, and pips of aniseed. Let it be made with blood and bile, and let the pills be made, and one should be thrown into hot water, and be placed in the nostrils of the patient forwardly.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter.XXV.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	Of the nose nasals at the ends.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Is there a visible lump in the ends of the nose, and it is large and swollen within a few days when it looks at him.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And so that you cover up that part in the beginning of its appearance, and leave all that part.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	Then place over the spot or cauterize or apply a burning medicine that is at the spot.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	Then if the incision is delayed within which it is swollen, then consider whether it is lapping, hard, of black color and poor feeling; then do not touch that part with iron because it is an ape-like fever for that part over which the great evil has fallen.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	Then if the fever is from the lion' touch and it is not of black color, then consider whether incision can be made on all that part, then evacuate the patient and incise that part with great care, and cure the spot with water that has been described and dried within which it is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter.XXVI.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	Of the nose surgery and of the lips and the ears when continuity is broken by plague or similar.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	You know that when a solution of continuity occurs in one of these joints, it does not confer much on the operation unless in some people.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then, when that cause occurs in those people, then consider whether it is a fresh plague with the scalp's edge, and then adjust the two lips of the plague to suture, and then cure that part within which it is healed.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the lips of the wound have already separated and each is healed, then cover that you do not separate any part of its apparent cord without leaving a scar.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the two lips with sutures and strengthen them, and over them spray dragon's blood and trimester, and over the powder place a piece of fine plaster or another of the consolidative plasters, and leave it lying for two days or three, then remove it and replace the plaster and leave it lying until the wounds are healed, and then heal it with ointment within that it be healed.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	May the manner of the suture is that you add the solution of continuity or with needles as we have described in the suture of the belly, or add the solution of Continuity with plaster as well as to the above, and let it know.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter .XXVII.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	Of the extraction of those causes that come in the two lips inside the separations.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Moles that are seen inside the separations of their lips sometimes are hard and resemble warts, and some of them are small and some are large.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	And then cover that you turn the lips and close each one of those hard things entirely, and then clean the place with trimester within that the blood be strangled, and then wash it with vinegar and cure the place with water that is astringent, until it is healed.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter .XXVIII.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	Of the incision of the flesh adjusted in the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Great of moles that are seen on the gum's meat adjusted that the small ones appeal to white, so then you suspend that one by a string or have it in your foci and cut that one from its root, and leave the blood run or the blood.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	And then place over the area trimeter or other dry powders or astringent.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if that meat returns, then cut it again secondarily, and cauterize it, since the cauterization will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter  .XXXIX .
De razo de dentz am ferr.	Due to teeth being sharp.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When, in the surface of teeth in separations inside and between the gums are sharp edges, leeching, and some moles are black and are formed citrines or green within that the gum comes by water corruption, and some teeth are leeching.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And so then that you file it carefully with a sharp tool between your teeth and place the top of it on the tongue, and chisel the teeth where those edges appear like sand within that they do not cause any other cause, and that is caused by the blackness and the citrinity and the others as if they had been whittled out.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	So if it is the last one that is in those of the beginning of the root, it is not; and then, you repeat the root on those to the other day and the second and the third one until it comes to the last statement that you want.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And know that teeth have need of different shapes and figures according to how they are prepared for your surgery.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And so, since the root with which the tooth is cut from the inside has another shape than the root with which it is cut between teeth according to other shapes, and these root shapes are always prepared as if you will see them soon enough:
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter  .XXX.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	Of the extraction of teeth: with the general procedure that we have described as to how to extract the root of each tooth in the body, and if the operations are easy, and if any others are necessary, and if they are soft or hard, and if they are straight or curved, and if they are small or large, and if they are from one member to another.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	Then that you heal the tooth from its pain immediately and wait for a long time before carrying out the complete extraction of it, since there is no reason to substitute the substance of it when it is extracted, because it is a sublime substance within that it is excusable in the extraction of it.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	And the extraction of teeth should be done with a careful procedure and with onza or any other way that is necessary, and it should be maintained by the patient a healthy diet and a lot of liquor, when convenient, for the solution of the patient's pain.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Then you must make sure which is the painful tooth, and that you know it well, then that you scarify in the circuit of the tooth with the spatula in which there is any virtue, within that it is dissolved from the gum completely, and then cut it at the beginning little by little until that concavesquas.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And then, to keep him well-fed and strong, give him plenty of good food or drink, and place the head of the patient between his knees so that he can't move them, and hold the tooth in his hand according to its position so that it doesn't break or cause him more pain.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And if it isn't broken yet, then take one of those instruments and remove it easily from the patient with a gentle effort so that it doesn't break at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	But if the tooth is broken or worn down, then cover it with a thin strip of cloth and hold it gently at the end with a sharp instrument so that it doesn' t break in the hour of your contraction on it; hold it like this while you work on it.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And then, cut carefully at the edge of all parts of the gums and keep your strength so that you don' t break it or cause a further split in it, and return to the patient because the pain is less than that of the first time.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And be careful that you don' t cause bleeding during the extraction as careless barbers do at the end of their ignorance and audacity about eradicating it; for, with such bleeding, great harm is done to those who suffer from it, all of their roots may be pulled out, or some of them, or the tooth may be extracted with some bones from the jaw thus:
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And then, after washing the patient's mouth with water and salt, or a strong vinegar,
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if there is blood coming out of the tooth, like what you see with a bleeding tooth, then cut a little piece of flesh and apply it to the wound, and if that doesn' t stop it, then cauterize it.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The shape of the forceps and tweezers should be long, thin, small-handed, and thick so that they don' t bend when you work with them.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And it should be like this, sometimes with a thick handle so that when you first use them they don' t bend, short ends.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And they should be made of iron from India, with short ends, and some of the ends of those should fit into others and tighten together firmly by their very shape, like a bird's beak, which is sharp, and some of them are the shape of a bird's beak; that is how they should be made.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter .xxxi.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	Of the extraction of teeth and the breaking of bones from the mandible that has been broken.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you need to extract a tooth that has been broken, then return to the site with a poultice for a day or two until it softens; and then apply a poultice or cloth at both ends of what is broken, like the beak of a bird, called ciconia or gauntlet, and make the forceps in the form:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The ends of it should be made smooth with lime or alfaga.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if you don' t obey the instructions with these forceps or tweezers, then return to the root and cut away all the flesh and apply the instrument which has this name, that is a small plectrum, whose shape is as follows:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	It should have a thick end, short and not sharp so that it isn' t broken.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	So it is good if the root is broken by water, and otherwise, help yourself with these other instruments which are of this shape: the first instrument should be triangular in shape at its ends, and some thickness should be present:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The shape of the second instrument should be like this: triangular, but with a thinner end.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And then you are helped by these instruments, having two ramps whose shape is as follows: the ramp of the forceps should be longer than the other one.
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	And with other instruments which will help to shave the teeth; for this instrument is useful in making an incision in one place, and that is its shape:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	of a triangular end that is bent or short, and some thickness should be present, and it shouldn' t be broken.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And you should know that the dental instruments are similar to those used for other purposes.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	But the skilled and subtle artisans in this art, working on themselves as well as others according to their needs, will find that they have the same instruments that they use for other purposes; for it is because of these various ailments that small instruments were not invented or used by them, because of the various shapes.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the bone of the mandible or any other bone in the mouth is broken, then clean it well at the site with water that is convenient to you with the instruments and forceps we have mentioned in the extraction of tooth roots; help yourself with gestures whose shape is as follows:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	It should be of some small thickness to small thickness, and it should be tied or wrapped around the mouth so that it doesn' t slip or move until all the bone is broken; then restore the site with appropriate medicine according to water.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if there is a small hole in the bone, then cut out that part of the bone and its blackness, and clean it well inside so that it heals.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter.xxxii.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	Of the treatment of prominent teeth next to others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When the teeth are prominent next to their natural courses, and especially when they are in female mouths, and especially in old women; so return that tooth to its place: but if it isn' t joined to any other tooth, then cut it out with this instrument whose shape is as follows: it is similar to a pig' s ear, and made of iron from India with an acute end.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And that is your incision through which you cut the tooth in two days because of the hardness of the tooth, and not to injure any other teeth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the prominent tooth is difficult to cut with a file, then sharpen it with a file of iron from India, whose shape is as follows:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	It should be all of iron from India and the edge sharp; and it should have a few points like needles made with it, by which the tooth is gradually cut in two days with ease, so that no other teeth are injured or cut.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	Then smooth out that edge, and cut it with a very sharp razor.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if it is a tooth the edge of which is broken and the language of that part is stuck or caught, then return to the site where the sharpness of that fragment is held back and smoothed out so that the tongue doesn' t get caught or the word isn' t corrupted.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter.xxxiii.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	Of restoring broken teeth with gold or silver fillings.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When the teeth are injured by impact or from a fall, and don' t break easily when you try to remove them with medicine, then return to those that can be fixed with gold fillings, not silver; for silver changes color quickly and can't be used for those that need to be fixed with gold fillings, unless you want them to rust after some days, but gold never changes.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	It should be of such thinness and thickness according to how much it can fit between teeth; and the shape of the filling is that you take twice as much gold between two sound teeth, and then cut it into two pieces of similar shapes, or if one is larger than the other, or one or both are uneven, so that when they are placed between the teeth they form a complete filling.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And then go back to the beginning of the incision you started with, and tighten your hand with ease and wisdom so that it is not too tight.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And make your stitch with which you tighten the thread of the teeth that do not unravel.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	Then cut off the excess of the thread with pincers or tweezers and add it to somewhere, and hide it between the healthy tooth and the damaged one, so that it does not cause injury to the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	Then let this stitch stay tight with a thread.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	If it comes loose or ruptures, tighten that one or those with another thread throughout the whole time.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	This is how the teeth are arranged and the figure of the correction of two healthy teeth and two damaged ones, linked like this:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when one tooth or two come back to their original position, and are renewed like this with a hole, and remain in place.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And it is not until the good artisan and wise master does this.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And some are appropriate for a cause of the bones of the cow, and they are done like this with the form of a tooth, and placed in the place where the tooth fails, and tightened like that when I have said it, and remain and are served by that for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter.xxxiv.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	Of the incision of the thread that runs through the tongue, and prohibits licking.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This thread which is left of the tongue sometimes or is natural to that man, or happens by accident and happens because of a plague that has already set in.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation on it is that you work on the patient's mouth, and raise his tongue, and then cut off that nervous thread according to its width so that the tongue does not tear.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	If there is any hardness or inflammation in that part, and it has stood for the consolidation of the plague, then you cut off one thread and cut off that part according to its width so that you do not cut off the thread and the inflammation is removed.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And keep it so that there is no crack in the bone of the meat, and you cut off here as a bar and bring forth the flow of blood.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	And then wash the wound of the incision with clean water or with vinegar, or with fresh water by rubbing it; and then return the tongue to its place in all cases so that it is not consolidated again.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	If there is a flow of blood, place a piece of vinegar on the wound; if the blood flows because it is hot, then cauterize that place with caustic iron that is mixed with water.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	Then treat that one with the other causes so that it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter.xxxv.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	Of the extraction of a runa from the tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Sometimes it happens that the tongue is swollen like a small hernia, prohibiting the tongue from its normal operation; and strong is increased so that it fills the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the operation on it is that you make a small incision in front of the sun, and consider the swelling.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you turn your attention to a color or black, hard one, at which the patient does not respond, then do not touch that part where it is harsh.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it is inclined to whiteness, indicating moisture, then you put ointment on it, and cut off that part with a fine knife, and cut off the whole incision; and if blood flows in the hour of your operation, then you pause, dressed with three pieces of vinegar, so is vinegar, within that it is stopped.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then continue with your work so that you have not betrayed it with generosity, within that it is washed with clean water and salt; and treat this one with the other cure with water so that it is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter.xxxvi.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	Of the extraction of two ears and that one which is nothing in the belly, and of the other swelling.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When the swelling has gone away in the belly, then it is a gland that has been gathered there, which happens sometimes before, and are two ears, which, when you treat them with water as I have said in the division, and if they do not heal, then consider whether the swelling is hard, of white color, of little feeling, then do not touch that part with iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is a red swelling and the hair is thick, then do not touch that part with iron because of the flow of blood; but leave it there so that it may mature, and then take it out, or cut it off by itself.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is a white swelling, and the root is subtle, then that part is to be cut off.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the operation on it is that you consider it before your operation, if it has already stopped the swelling of its part, or has decreased by a little amount; and then put the patient in front of the sun, and place his head in the middle of the table, and open his mouth, and serve themselves between their hands from the language of the patient with a sharp instrument which has this form:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	It is made of silver or brass, and is subtle with the knife.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	So you press it with that thread on the tongue and show it to yourself the swelling, and put oil on it, and hold it in place with a pin, and pull it out at the ends as much as you can.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And another water that has no cause of the garments, and then cut off that one with the instrument which has this form:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	And it is put together with tweezers, but the ends of them are sharp, so that the opening of each one is in the edge of the other, very pointed, which is made of iron tempered and tempered.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	If this instrument is not with you, then cut off that one with a knife, which has this form: It is sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And then, after having cut one edge, cut the other according to this method of incision, and then the incision of the patient is washed with fresh water by rubbing it.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If there is a flow of blood, wash the water with a decoction of sloe or of mirabella and apply it to that part which has caused the blood, within that the blood flow is stopped, and then treat that one within that it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	Sometimes two ears are found in the belly, and those are cut off according to what I have said in the incision of two edges together.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And I have already treated a woman with an swelling that was born in her belly, which swelling tended to white color, of little feeling, which had already closed the belly of the woman, and she breathed straight, and she had forbidden her food and drink, and she was near death if she did not drink some water in two or three days.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the swelling has already grown so much that it has pushed out two breasts, and they have come out through two openings.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	Then I have already had a fit of laughter and I fell down with one of my hands, and I threw that one, and there was a great deal of it, and then I cut off that hand with the other one, and then I put my hand into his mouth, and I pressed his tongue, and then I put my hand on his tongue, and I closed his mouth.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	Then I cut off a great part of it, and there was little blood from it.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	So absolutely the cause of that woman's fever, and soon it began to drink water, and approached food, so I did not stop slicing off those spots of meat for a long time, and they were replaced with spots of that one, which was sliced until it was extended.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	So you cut off and cauterized that woman's fever, and then added something else; and I walked around and didn't know what to do with that man who was next to her.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter .xxxvii.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	On incision of the hyle when it is apopleptic.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When the hyle is apopleptic and long, then it is called transverse; and if it is thick and round at its border, then it is called a bub.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	But when it is cured with water which we have said in the division, and do not confide your cure, and sometimes that apoplex is already stayed there and is thin, then you should know that you cut off those that are agreguadas round; and if it is long, and is blood, of dark or black color, and does not go down to him a hundred times, then you should know that you cut off his hyle, for there is fear about the patient'
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you see that second way which I have said of its whiteness and length, that you make a point of the hyle and press the tongue of him with an instrument with which it processes its form and keeps the onions in the new one, and pulls those down and cuts them off with one of two instruments which are called incisers.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And if you do not cut off that part except with water which is adjusted over the natural term of its addition, for if you cut off him more, you will tear his speech apart.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And then make the incision, use with water which we have described in the incision of two members, and heal that part within so it is healed.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the hyle is terrified by his incision, then use with water in cauterizing him is only to stop the flow of blood, and the way of cauterization on him is only with sharp water, and it is because you pause the top of the hyle on his leg, and then press the tongue of him with an instrument which we have said, and then take from the water which we have described in the chapter of cauterization, and make it come alive, and do not allow that part to be thick or small, and then fill its cavity with the instrument whose shape is mentioned:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	The extramiteit of him should be filled in its cavity in which medicine is placed with the cavity of a spoon, and put the instrument on the uvula, and the disease grumbles over his throat so that saliva or mucus comes out from his mouth by the intrinsic medicine, so that it does not go down from that for any reason about his throat, and it will stop him.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And then hold your hand over the medicine, and press that on the uvula for a space of half an hour within which it goes dark and is numb by the biting of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you want, take hold of it and wrap that over the extremities of the hyle, and dip the crotch in the medicine, and put the hyle into a tube so that the crotch adheres to that tube, and make it come out as many times as you get out what you want from the cauterization of the uvula, and let that be because it will dry up and fall after three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you want to repeat the medicine, repeat that, and then the cauterization is washed in the circuit of the uvula with crotch wrapped up in border, and it is made clean by him with water which rubs, and it is washed inside with embalmings within which it is healed.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	This type of cure is more secure than incision and less feared.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Some are cured by the uvula with water which is more subtle than cauterization and incision, for it is healed by sub-fumigatio in this way: take steam, hyssop, oregano, rugosa, sicative arabic, chamomile, bread and similar to those of the herbs, and adjust all of these causes, or some of them, in a pan, and dip them in vinegar, and boil; and the pan is well-luted with water in an appropriate way, and a hook of silver or iron is put over the trauch; it is made from silver or iron.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And the extremities are inserted into the mouth of the patient within which the steam goes to the uvula over the quantity, within which the uvula is dark.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And then repeat over that spots which are dark, and keep in mind that you do not make this cure at the coming of apoplexies, for it would adjust too much in the apoplexy, and do not make water, but rather the declaration of the apoplexy of him caut.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	But if you do not have this instrument with you, then take a cane and form on the extremities of him a hook of leather, so that the mouth of the patient is closed, for the hook of the skin prohibits the steam to burn the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	This cure is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter .xxviii.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	Of extraction of thorns and of water which adheres to the throat and of other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Spots on the throat or thorn of pay or any other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	And then you take water which appears from that, and the eye sees it, for you press the tongue with an instrument in front of the sun, so that to you is declared water that is in the throat.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And water which does not appear to you in the throat, then make the patient vomit before that food is digested in the stomach, for it brings the cause of the throat by vomiting; or that he swallows a fish of nap or of lettuce or a piece of bread dry; or take one of a sponge of sea-dry lion, and bite that strongly with teeth, and then make the patient swallow it, for if you extract it to the place in which thorns are extracted, then you vomit.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And then take a snake and bite it with teeth, and let it be inside the table and extracted; or take a weasel and bite it with teeth, and let it be outside the table and extracted.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	But if you do not throw those causes which we have said, then use of an iron instrument according to this way:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And it is thicker than a little one, and in the extremities of him is hollow which you put in its throat with ease.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And make the patient raise his head up, and keep in mind that you do not touch the bone of the throat, for it will go to him with pain on what he puts his nose or spine or because he makes a noise with it, or because it is made by him with his hand.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	But I say that the patient's position is better, as it can determine the location of the cause and prevent it from getting worse by turning it inwards and pulling at its hand with the instrument held in your hand, all this according to the quantity prepared for him until it is ready to be used.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter .XXXIX.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	On the extraction of blood from an ankle joint attached to the knee.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When blood is extracted from an ankle joint attached to the knee, consider first the patient's right leg, because you have confused the language of the instrument I told you about.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Then if you want to extract blood, do so with a small and gentle motion carefully.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not possible for you to extract it in that way, then take a hollow tube and insert it into the knee joint, and put an igniting iron into it, burning it as many times as necessary (until the blood comes out of the knee joint) and keeping the patient away from water all day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	Then take a full bottle of water and insert the mouth into it, and wash the mouth with it; and do not drink anything from it for an hour or two afterwards, because the blood will come out after feeling the water.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	But if it is not ready to be used with the water I told you about, then smoke the patient with frankincense or assa-fetida using the instrument I told you about in the process of smoking the throat.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Make water, and do it quickly.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	This is another way of operating with smoke, that you take a jar filled with burning charcoal and covered with a cloth, and place the end of the instrument in it; then remove the smoke-making device; and put the patient's mouth at the end of the tube, and close their mouth so that the smoke does not escape until you know that the smoke is reaching the blood, because the blood will come out quickly.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if it doesn't work, then repeat the smoke process more times, and keep the patient away from water, eat salty foods and drinks, and don't drink water, and so on, as necessary, that is, when following this regime, it does not work.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	This is the shape of the instrument used to extract blood from a knee joint when seen; and it is similar to scissors times three, except that it has no curves:
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	then place it on the knee joint, and the end of it is similar to a sycamore bird's beak, which is sharp, so that when you press any part of it, it doesn't let go.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter.XL.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which is the sum of the speech in the preparation of emetics and in section of them.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	The emetics are made from different ways, according to the memory of the person who prepares them, and each one in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they are so various in piercing and sectioning them by two ways, one is for the specific emetics in themselves; and by the other, which is to press them with humidity.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second way is according to the locations in which they occur in the body, because the emetic that occurs in the head is different from the one that occurs in the buttocks; and the emetic that occurs in the flesh is different from the one that occurs in a joint; and each one is a game for operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And some emetics are those which are not pierced but rather are the result of a slow development of the disease in them, or their completion.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	And other emetics are those which are not pierced but rather are the result of a slow development of the disease in them, or their completion; so that, when they occur near a joint, they cause a spasm in that joint, because the essence of it is prolonged until it reaches a circuit, and it strengthens the ligaments or nerves of that joint, causing a contraction of that limb; or it occurs near a main member, and if you delay its piercing, it will not be mature for the main member; or it occurs near the buttocks, so pierce it which does not mature, so that it cannot reach the end of it, and it is elongated towards the openings at the back of the buttocks, causing a fistula, or that it appears on the skin without healing.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	But you should know the time to pierce the emetic, and then it is when it is mature.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And you should know that it is mature when the pain is reduced, when the fever has ended, and when the pulse slows down and the head of the emetic becomes sharp, and the other symptoms.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And since you know the time to pierce it, cut it in the place that is further from the emetic and further away from the cure of the eminence.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And the piercing should be done at a time when the meat or the body is long, if the emetics occur in the openings of the limbs, and in the places of the ligaments, of the nerves, of the joints; and, lastly, everywhere where it is engulled, for in those that are reflected, use the piercing according to the member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	But when the emetic is in a fleshy place, then wait until it has been digested completely according to its completion, as I have said; for if you pierce it before it is fully digested, it will prolong the member of the body with a sharp pain and a strong ardor, and it will be difficult to close the lips of it.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	And some emetics should be pierced according to the location of the flesh or the body, considering necessity, or according to which member is digested.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And if you administer a small piercing, and in the large emetics a large piercing and cut them according to the diversity of their size.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And others are emetic that should be pierced where the cord is cut and it is torn, when it happens so that it has already been torn, like those that occur in the eyes or in the ears.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And those that are not cut in section have three sides; and of those that are cut with a figure of an oak leaf, and of the emetics of the joints.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And they are those in which round section is administered, and similar to them.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	But that which does not have a head should be pierced with a superficial piercing, so that you pierce it with a superficial piercing or flat one only.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And when the emetic is large and has collected some matter, then pierce it and do not cover it so that you extract all of it at once; cut a part of it off, and the next day cut off another part, and cut off water with it according to the quantity prepared for him until it is ready to be used.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	And more specifically if the patient is of a virile nature, or a female, or a small child, or an old man in decrepitude; because the animal spirit moves quickly to leave the disease, and it strongly hurts the patient, and you open them up.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Keep this chapter carefully and consider carefully how you administer the water to the patient; if the plague of the emetic is small, or it is a flat section, then you administer water through one hole, and if the emetic is large, and the holes made by piercing are numerous, then wait for the two to come together.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	E si in the apoplexy is cut away a part of the cord or has concaved that in the circuit, then cover that you compress it with a cotton wool or a thread made of cloth of li, thus as when you have baked loaves or razes, your humidity; and strengthen this within the third day; and proceed with that and cure them that cover them within that it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	Or if there is a flow of blood at the time of your operation, then you administer cold water and vinegar and wrap a cloth of li around them, and place that over the area of the flow of the blood with visible drops.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	Or if the flow of blood persists, then cover that you administer the remedy and powders which I have recommended in many places of this our book and division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	Or if it is in winter time, and the place of the apoplexy is a place of many nerves, then cover that you put powders in wine and oil cautery, and place those over the areas.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	Or if it is in summer, and the areas are carnose, then cover that you place powders immersed in water and oil or wine and oil, and all of this is frayed within that it is the third day, thus as I have said, and then, when you have removed the apoplexy and washed that, and administer to them the remedy that convenes to them within that it is healed.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And so is the water that is necessary of the knowledge of the cure of apoplexies universally, more according to the way of distinction I have said of every apoplexy in what way it is a way of the cure of them by chapters separately.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter xli.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	Of section of apoplexies that come in the cord of the head.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the small cord of the head there are apoplexies, and those of the species of nodes that contain tunics that are to their fact; and the species of them are drops.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And those are little drops, and those are that contain humidity resembling lemon.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And those are that contain humidity resembling milk, and resembling to them; and those are that are lapidary, hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those without fear, you should make the extension of those without causing pain to the fire.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation in section of them is that you spray them with an instrument the form which you place appropriately now, which is called entremes, within that you know that it contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	If the water that it contains is humidity, then you divide that with a section according to its length by a section superficial according to this form:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And you begin in the section of the line of B within the line of G. Since the humidity is eliminated, then you scrape that by what it contains that humidity, and do not leave of that any cause of all, for ten visible returns, if it remains of that any cause.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And you submerge that cotton in egg yolk, if it is present, and if not, in water and salt; and you fill that with blood and leave that within another day, since with water you can cut all that is covered by that film.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And you repeat that cotton in egg yolk secondarily and thirdly if it does not please you with it, within that you are confident that there was no cause of that film; then cure the blood with egg yolk within that it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	Or if apoplexy contains fatty nodules, then you incise that according to this form:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	as a shape of croze, and you get that between two lips of the section and you scrape that completely, and you exercise your virtue in the extraction of the tunic that it contains.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	Or if your fire makes pain to you, then do not cut that.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And you make semblant cutting in the apoplexy lapidary of the section and of the cure according to what I have said to you; and a section over apoplexy lapidary is lighter, since it is little blood and little humidity.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And some times those apoplexies are of the same sex as those that are in the head of an old woman and turn back that apoplexy now with deafness, sharp, white, which cannot be cut, and if it is hit by another, it will trouble that.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	Or in other apoplexies that have happened to the heads of children and those that come out of the ears are razes of the auricles, then the section of all these is a section superficial.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And you put off the perforation of those from the base that it is healed, within that it is relieved the wound with the base to the wounds with the bases.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	And then cure them with water that convenes to them in the cure of them.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter xii.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	Of section of scrofulas that happen in the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	These apoplexies appear in the collar and in the shoulders and in the arms, and some appear in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that happen in the neck, and those are generated among themselves, and all scrofula of them has its own tunic, and as in the nodules and apoplexies of the head, we have described it.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	The species of these scrofula are drops, since some of them are lapidary, and those that contain humidity, and the evil ones that do not submit to the cure.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Then in that you have good will in the Treatment, of which the color of the water that is manifested is proper to the color of the cord, and it is pleasing to all, and it does not annex itself to the nerves of the neck, or to the veins, or to the fire, and it is not thick, then you incise that with a section superficial from the base that is in contact with the base to the base, and you scrape that completely, and you extend two lipas of the cord with oncis, or with sharp razors if you need them, as we have said in the apoplexies of the head, and you extract that little by little.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is more careful not to be incised a vein or nerve.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And it is more careful not to be cut a vein or nerve. And if you cut the blood that does not affect your hand during the operation, or if it bothers the patient, and you leave that blood, then stop the pain of the apoplexy, and softens that blood, and begins to rot.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the blood is cut off.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Then returns to your operation within that you complete it.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And then you ask with the good advice if there is a cause of other little scrofula, then incise those and clean those.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	Or if it is in the raze of the great vein of scrofula, then you do not cut that scrofula of its raze.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Then stop that blood from flowing by doubling it firmly and leaving that within that it falls on itself without hurting anyone.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	And then fill the cup with cotton that you have already submerged in egg yolk, and then cure that blood.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	Or if you cut that scrofula completely, then cover the two lips of the cup and pour it out until there is none left.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	If it appears that there is too much fat on the patient’s neck and his skin hangs loosely over it, then you should know how to cut off the excess skin and then administer stitches and oil as described.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And that of the scrofula which contains moisture, pierce it at a shallow depth here where you see the pus come out of the patient’s body, and make another piercing from that pus to the skin as described above.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	Then administer the piercings, as well as ointment and poultice, so that it corroded what is rotten.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And when you see the plague has been cleansed, then heal it with ointment of fresh flesh so that it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter LII.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	On the section about removing the pilot of the abscess accidentally with a hole.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	They said that this treatment for the pilonidal abscess was common, and there was no one in our land who had ever done it.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of the sermon of those.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	If the patient has a tendency to have an abscess, then the extraction of the pilonidal abscess should be done carefully with water, because all the veins and most of the flesh of the patient are here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	If the patient has abscesses in the mouth or in the ears, or both, and the plague is not in the teeth, then you should know how to avoid the section of the pilonidal abscess so that loss does not occur due to deep piercing.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Then when you want to pierce it, let us inscribe the pilonidal abscess between three circles of the epilotic ring, or four at a small distance from its width, so that the section is in the cartilage, not in the bone, and this place is suitable for the section, because it is deprived of flesh, and the instruments for cutting are easily available.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the patient is thin, then his scrotum should be extended with a thong, and cut into it so that it reaches the channel, but avoid the instruments for cutting if there are any concerns.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And then cut it according to what we have said; and it is shown above the section of the channel by the flame, which is of that eye that comes out with blood, and because of the loss of blood.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	Then leave the plague open for a while.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	So that at the hour when the piercing is painful, add two lips to the scrotum of the plague, and pierce it through the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	Then administer medicines that promote the healing of the flesh so that it is healed.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And Albucasius said that the summary of the sermon we have described is an exposure which does not require further explanation: that some of these abscesses had already opened up the scrotum of the patient, and the patient was close to death, and his bowels were cut, and some wanted to pierce the epiglottis so that the patient could breathe through that place for a while in order to save him from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And I command that the plague be left open so that the evil of the plague is consumed; and this evil is for three days; and then I command to do thus with the plague, and heal it so that it is healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And I have seen this with my own eyes for my benefit: a servant held a knife and cut it into the scrotum of the patient near the canal of the lung, and I was called to his rescue; and when I heard the noise of the dying man, I discovered the plague and stopped the blood that was flowing from it.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Then you confessed that she had not cut a vein or done any damage, and breathed life into the plague, and healed it so that it was healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And if the servant had not injured her by piercing her, then some days later I returned to her good health.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	Then tell me that in the section of the pilonidal abscess there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter XLIV.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	On the section of an abscess that happens in the scrotum outside, and it is called a hernia of the scrotum.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This pilonidal abscess, which is called a hernia of the scrotum, is a great abscess according to the color of the body, and it appears in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	It has two ways: either it is natural or it is accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural it does not originate from cura.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental has two ways: one is similar to knotted flesh, and the other is like an abscess that is caused by the knotting of a blood vessel; in the latter there is a danger.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And it is not known to cause suspicion because it does not resemble iron in the small one.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you should test it and investigate it with a knife, and if you find it similar to knotted flesh, then extract it with a thread that goes through the skin and the fat; and if not, then examine all his body, and heal the place with oil that cures it, and if necessary, then examine all his body.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter XLV.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	On the section of knotted flesh.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	There are many kinds of nodules, and I have already described all their types in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And if you doubt between a knot and an exit with a knotted shape.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Then I say that if it is an exit, it is hot and feverish, with violent pain, and complete decay stops the fever, pain, and heat.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	Then a knot is not hot or feverish or painful, and it has a round shape that hangs loosely.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And it has two colors according to the body: either it is like knotted flesh and contains moisture, in which the color of the moisture is similar; or it is like a knot, and its beginning is a swelling.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Then when you approach the cure of a knot, test it and examine it with instruments that are called into question; according to which one is similar to this.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And this is the way to investigate abscesses and all kinds of nodules: you take this instrument, and introduce it into the place where there is moisture, which you find in an abscess; and then turn the threads small by small until you know that the instrument has penetrated the scrotum.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	Then finish your treatment according to the measure of the size of the abscess, and then remove the instrument that has been introduced; and consider whether there is any trace of it.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the moisture is lost, of whatever color it is, then you administer a superficial section according to what I have said about other abscesses.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if there is no trace of the instrument that has been introduced, then you know it is dry.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And dry over it with a section that does not have a shape of knotted flesh according to this form:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	Then follow the advice that has been given, and suspend it with a hook; and cut off all parts easily, and keep the thread or string, if you can, over the knot; and remove the thread from it with ease.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	If it breaks during the operation, then it is impossible to remove that thread; and many similar things can be seen in it, and then you extract them with ease within it; and if there are any broken parts, then you extract them, all of them, within it, so that they do not break anything else.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	If for some reason there is too much or too little blood, return it according to its nature.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you wish to cut off a small piece of the limb, then make a cut with sharp sharp-edged powder and apply it, and place over that area a poultice made from some corrosive sharp powder and heal that one with another treatment until it is healed.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if the swelling is great, then cut open both sides of the limb and heal it with something that dissolves.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	Or if the pulse is weak or not present, then bind it and apply heat to the area that hurts for three days or more until the wound heals and returns to its normal pulse; and then cut off what is rotten from the swelling.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter .xlvi.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	On the instruments necessary in section and perforation.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Of the three types of instruments, some are large, some are medium, and some are small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The large instrument is called:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The medium instrument is called:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The small instrument is called:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	If the iron, lead, or other sharp instruments are used, they must be sharpened properly so that they can enter the poultice.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	These are the three forms of treatment, and they are called: 1. Astringent (albered) 2. Irritant (berid) 3. Calming (non-specific)
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	Of the three types of instruments, some are large, some are medium, and some are small.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The large treatment is called:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The medium treatment is called:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The small treatment is called:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	It should be noted that the poultices, incisions, fistulas, and boils are for different purposes; they apply to bones and other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And they are made round, long, square, etc. With large needles, sewed with silk, and made with citrus juice, or iron, or silver, and with many other types of thread.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And the treatments with black plums, which it is said that through them the fistulas in the cavities where they are reflected are opened; that those reflections are brought to light.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	Of the three types of instruments, some are long, some are medium, and some are short, according to the size of the fistula and its tightness.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	The large treatment with lead is called:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	The medium treatment with lead is called:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	The small treatment with lead is called:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The shapes of the needles are of different types, some being simple, with only one curve, and there are three types of shapes: large, small, and medium.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And they are needle-like, and there are three types of them.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And they are needles with two curves, and there are three types of them.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And they are needles with three curves, and there are also three types of them.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	All of these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	The large simple needle shape is called:
Forma de unci simple migier:	The medium simple needle shape is called:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	The small simple needle shape is called:
Forma de unci orp gran:	The large needle shape with two curves is called:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	The medium needle shape with two curves is called:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	The small needle shape with two curves is called:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	The large needle shape with only one curve is called:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	The medium needle shape with only one curve is called:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	The small needle shape with only one curve is called:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	The large needle shape with three curves is called:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	The medium needle shape with three curves is called:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	The small needle shape with three curves is called:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	These are the shapes of the scalpel that cut and scrape the nodules and poultices; they are of three types, since some are large, others medium, and some small.
Forma de scapel gran:	The large scalpel shape is called:
Forma del scapel migier:	The medium scalpel shape is called:
Forma de scapel pauc:	The small scalpel shape is called:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The extremities of the instruments that are used for section are sharp, and the other extremities are not-sharp; they are not stopped in such a way, but are cut quickly in order to extract the nodule or pustule; they are also used for cauterizing blood vessels or nerves. After this procedure is performed, it heals with ease, providing relief from bleeding or pain, and also helps to relieve the fever caused by the inflammation of the nodule or pustule.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	These are the forms of the poultices, and they are of three types: large, medium, and small; also, with or without vinegar.
La forma de magda gran:	The large poultice shape is called:
Forma de magda migier:	The medium poultice shape is called:
Forma de magda pauc:	The small poultice shape is called:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	If it is made with iron or silver, and seems to radiate heat; if made with lead or copper, and feels cold.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And it is in the middle part, not punctured, and hidden within it; and it spreads out from inside to the outside, as you wish.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	These are the forms of the plasters, which are applied between the fingers and the joints to heal the pustules; they are not sharp; they are of three types, large, medium, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the shapes of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of veils that separate the limbs are made with three types of thread: large, medium, and small.
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	If it is made with citrus juice, round in shape, and subtle; if it is made with lead, it is hard and sharp; if with iron or silver, it is strong and durable.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And these are the types of veil that separate the limbs, and they are made with different threads to prevent the flow of blood; and when it is first used, it does not have any medicinal value.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, it does not use them to stop the flow of blood throughout the entire body, but only in certain areas; for example, at the joints of the arms and legs, at the sides of the neck, and on the skin. It is applied to the skin with moisture from humors.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	Some veils are made with other small instruments that look like scars; because of this shape, the blood is stopped when it is cut by a bleeding vessel or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	Some veils are made round according to this form:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter .xlvii.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	Treating the breasts of men that are made of women.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some veils are inflated with air; when the breast of a man is covered with cloth, they are deflated; then the breasts of women are assembled, and the nipples are inflated with air.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you wish to cut off a limb with a lunar section according to this form, from the line B to the line G; then extract all the badness, and apply the plaster of medicine; also, sew up both sides of the wound with a suture, and heal it within.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	If the breast falls apart and is soft because of its size; then it is cut into two halves; each half is shaped like a lunar section, with one half containing the other within itself, as if the major line contains the minor line according to this form of the line B and the line G. And when the nipple is removed, which is between the two halves of the breast, then it is cut into two pieces; and the flesh is extracted with a suture, and applied to the wound with powder that eases the pain; and returned it to its normal state, as needed, within the sutures, and heal it.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not please the incision of this water that covers to incision by the uneasiness of the patient, and for flow of blood, then cover that you fill the cup with submerged in corrosive enguent and leave that it enters which corrupts that is bones of the grayssa, and approach cure that which is saned.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter .xlviii.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	On the piercing of blisters that come out from under the skin.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	These blisters that come out from under the skin are of the species of scrofula, sores, which have a puss that is drained.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And of those some that contain moisture; and those that contain moisture cover that they are cut with lunar section according to this figure: from the line of G to the line of B. And when it is totally drained this water that is in the blister of the patient, then you close it with cotton wool and leave the entry open for another day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And the cotton wool remain and are saned by means of a suitable enguent to water, entry that is saned.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the blister of the nodes is, and of the scrofula, then you cut it over that same way that I have said in section on the scrofula equally.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	Perhaps if the plague is extended on a foot that hurts, then administer to it by means of the cautery according as I have said before.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter.xlix.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	On the piercing of blisters that come out by way of an artery or a vein.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an artery is broken and the cord is consolidated that is over that, then see-like blisters appear: for by means of which the inflammation and blister come out by way of the artery or vein: since when the blister is pierced to the bowels with a needle, you hear it make a noise.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And that which is by vein is round on the surface of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And the section of this blister is a mistake, and mainly in that which comes out from under the skin, and in the armpits, and on the back; and it is great, then cover that its cure by means of iron be avoided, and that which is in the extremities, or at the top, is avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	Perhaps on that which is by inflammation of the orifice of the artery, then cut in the cord in the middle; and approach the section to a needle and approach the artery, and free it from the tunics as much as you can.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And approach a needle on that and let it enter the other way, and stretch the artery by means of a double knot in two places; -- which causes you to have a good hand in cutting out two arteries which are in the temple.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And approach pierce the knot that is between two threads to the point within that it causes all the blood to come out while it is in your hand, and dissolve the blister.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And administer cure by means of which is generated fire within that falls the threads; and approach cure that by means of a suitable enguent to water be saned within that it is saned.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if it is a blister by section of a vein, then cover that you hold with your hand where the blister is in the cord, and approach pierce the knot from which you have held your hand, and let the needle enter; and be in that double thread within that you extract that from the other way, and approach bind the blister to one thread as much as it can.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	Perhaps if you are afraid to cut the thread, then approach pierce the thread with a needle from under all the blister, and tighten the threads in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	And approach dry the blister in its own place within that when it is wet there is water within that, then you cut off the surplus of the cord, and leave that which is wet.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And approach place over it the palm of your hand that you have submerged in oil or vinegar, and approach administer cure by means of water and enguent to be saned within.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Chapter 1 of the blister that is caused by twisting of the nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	As when it happens that a blister is caused by an artery or a vein, and as if it were caused by the percussion of anything or by unnecessary work, and as if it were caused by the tension of nerves.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And it is the same in all places where joints are swollen or in all places where they are sore.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And it is a heavy blister, and it corresponds to the color of the other part of the body, and it is in the major places of the skin that it has been stretched out by violence, you feel in it as if it were stunned.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And it is not a blister that is added to the bowels of the body, and therefore it remains by itself, and is swollen from ahead as well as from behind.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	So then that which is at the joints does not seem to be inflamed by means of iron, because it would probably become stronger in opposition.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	And that which is in the head or in the forehead remains by itself with a knot.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	Perhaps if it is a small blister, then you will cut it with a sharp knife and drain it from the root.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is large, then you will suspend it by means of a thread, and drain it off, and approach stop it up; and bind the blister with sutures, and cure that which is saned.
Capitol .li.	Chapter.Li.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	On the piercing of a blister that is caused by chewing which is caused by eating.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	In the end of the meal, there are some people who have a blisters on their bellies and on other parts of the body by eating food which is similar to mushrooms, of which the root is fine and the top is large; and those whose lips are swollen, and those who are small, and those who are very much so.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I have seen one, and in its belly there were two things that looked like mushrooms, and there was no difference between them, for their roots were small.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And the lips of those people were swollen, and they dribbled, and moisture flowed from them all the time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	So you cut off those things and weighed them against a weight that weighs eighteen pence. and the other one was sixpence.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And the operation in cutting them is that you consider afterwards whether they are wet or not, and if their color is white, wet, and of small roots; then cut them with a needle, and let them be in your presence, for it is said that the blisters are expelled by means of blood; and if you want to drink blood, cauterize that one.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if the patient is a little bit afraid or scared, do not administer cure by means of iron; but then approach take some fresh metal from a fire, and tighten that which is white, the way that it has been said; and leave that for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	And then approach tighten that which is made of small metal; so, do not tighten that much as it would be broken, and let it fall by itself by means of its own work.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	Perhaps if that which is made of large roots, then there is no cause for fear and anxiety in cutting it, but more so in that which is in the belly.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	Perhaps you will cut off a part of it, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And approach cure that which is saned the wound.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And be careful not to cut the ileum which is of brown color, of scarce feeling, and little regard, for that is where cancer begins.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And I came to remember crucifixes nearby.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter II.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	On the cure of umbilical hernias.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	Umbilical eminence may be caused by several factors: either by fissures of the navel that project into the abdomen, and the intestine or hernia exits through them; or by a mass flowing from a vein or artery depending on whether it emerges in front or behind; or by constriction of the ventosis.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	Perhaps if it is due to a fissure of the navel and the projection of the intestine, then the color of the swelling is similar to that of the body; and if there is pain in it, and its appearance is different.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	If it is due to the exit of the intestine, then the situation of that is if we have described it, of very different nature, and when you press that with the fingers it disappears, and there is a strong sensation in it; and it is enhanced by a hot bath and hard work.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	Perhaps if it is due to moisture, then it is obvious and does not disappear when pressed with the hand, nor is it constricted or crushed.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it is due to the passage of air, then these signs appear on the swelling: it darkens and declines.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	Perhaps if it is due to meat, then it is a heavy, dense, and hard swelling, and its size depends on the quantity.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	Perhaps if it is due to air, then touch is painful.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation in it is that you consider: if the eminence of the navel is due to air passage, or to vein, or to ventosis; then you must prohibit the cure of it, because there is danger and fear in it, as I have taught in the chapter where I speak of swellings caused by veins and arteries.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the navel eminence is due to the intestine or hernia, then you order the patient to lie down on their back, and maintain the swelling in the center of the navel with your hand; and then you stretch it as much as possible towards the sides with your fingers, and hold it firmly. And then you cut off a large part of the swelling at its roots with a sharp knife; and then you tie it up tightly with a ligature, and make sure that it is well tied.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And then you cut off the middle part of the swelling with your fingers extended above the navel and insert your finger into that opening; and if you do not find any resistance by the intestine, you pull it out with force and push the hernia down towards the belly button.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have reached the intestine, then take one; and cut off any excess.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	Perhaps if it is opposite to your vein or artery, then you return to your work; and you take two needles and insert them into those two threads that you have made around the swelling in a crisscross pattern, which are to pierce; and then you tighten the swelling in four places with the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you want to do so, then remove the needles and allow the location to remain as it is, and may heal on its own; or cut it off where it has thinned out, and then cure that with water that has been heated.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the navel eminence is due to meat or moisture, then you must cut off the swelling in such a way as I have described; and then cure that with water that has been heated, and consolidate the location.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter LIII.
De curacio de cranc.	On the cure of cancer.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have said, in the division, of the nature of cancer and how to treat it with medicines, and that a squiller is effective in treating it so that it does not ulcerate; and we have said that cancer is born in the mother, and with great caution in the treatment of it.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And they said that some small cancers are in the breasts or in the groin, and resemble those of the limbs, and especially when they are starting; and most importantly when they are still small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	Perhaps if it is old and large, you do not approach it, because I cannot cure it on my own, nor have I seen anything like it, nor has it been brought to me in water.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation in it is as I have said: you proceed and leave the patient, and if you have found a small cancer, then you cut off its root; and if it is a large one, then you make an incision and drain out the pus, and then you cure it.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And then you prepare the patient for the operation, and if it is a small one, you make an incision with a sharp knife where it is located; and then you cut out all of it, and then you wash thoroughly with water from every part so that you do not miss any of its roots.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And you let the blood flow, and do not wash it away, and press the swellings, and clean up the large blood with your hand or with an instrument that is at your disposal.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Perhaps if you have a contradiction with the flow of large blood from a vein or artery, then you cauterize that part so that the flow ceases, and then you cure it with another treatment while it remains healthy.
Capitol .liv.	Chapter LIV.
De curacio de ydropici.	On the cure of dropsy.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already mentioned, in the division, of the nature of water dropsy and the signs of each species, and how to treat it with medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	That which is cured by iron is only the species of algorism alone; it is not approached to the species of timphorism or to the species of hyposarcasm, because water is deadly.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have already treated this species of timphorism with medicines and do not give your medicine to the patient, then be careful, for if it is a small dropy or large, as if it is a cough or stomach ache similar to that, then you must not treat it with iron, because there is danger in it.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	Perhaps if you discover the patient's great virtue, and that is only a species of dropsy, and no child or old person, then the way to operate on it is that you raise the patient between your hands, and the servant applies pressure to the navel with his hand, letting the water flow from one side to the other, and then you take a sharp knife:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	It should be of two sharp ends, one at each end as long as it is, and then little by little, so that in the operation with it you do not pass into the bowel, and that you wash it well.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And you must consider whether the generation of dropsy is from the intestines, because it is usual for the navel to project by three fingers from one side to the other, on the right side above the navel.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	Perhaps if the generation of dropsy is from the fetus, then your incision should be on the left side of the navel by three fingers.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the generation is due to its own self, then your incision should be on the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And that your section be not above the rib whereon you wish to operate on the patient so that superfluities do not run to that place of joy.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	Then pierce the whole rope, and insert it into that section, and raise your hand to the spatulum between the rope and the syphac, and you shall extract that; and if the quantity be of an index finger or more.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	Then pierce the syphac so that it enters where you wish, and this is a place of water.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Then extract that and insert an instrument whose form this is:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	It is like a tube of fine silver; it is made of silver or ivory or brass, and in its end is put a little notch, and on its sides three notches: two from one end and one from the other; and its tip is sharpened according to the way of feathers, sometimes thus:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And at the end of it is placed an armilla, because when the instrument enters into the water, then suddenly, in half a measure quantity, for if you evacuate from that less than it covers in the hour, then greatly weakens the patient by rezolucion of his animal spirit, or happens to him five times that is approaching death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	Then evacuate from that according to the quantity of its virtue and according to what you understand the dispositions of the patient, the virtue of his pulse, and the goodness of it.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	Then extract the instrument, and retain the water which causes this because as much is retained by the rope that retains the notch which is above the syphac of which I recommend to you that you pierce it according to that manner.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	Then repeat the instrument another day if the patient tolerates water, and extract from the water a small quantity, and make water pass through several days for fear, and keep yourself from error within that not to let it run from the water except a little.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	Then if you fear for the patient, and let go of a great quantity of water, then cure that person to bury itself in sand, and move it gently in a bath, and wait on the sun for a long time; and cure that with drying medicines within that it be healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	Then cauterize over the stomach, and let it out of the water, according to what I have told you that it is preceded.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter 51.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	Of the treatment of children who are born with the places of their urine not pierced.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Some born children are found from the womb of their mother and the head of their mixture is not pierced (or a notch is not made straight or is not in its place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Then it is necessary to pierce it so that it is born with the spatulum a little subtile movement according to this form:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	Then place in the notch a little subtile hammer of lead and join it, then for three days or for .iii..
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when he wants to urinate, let him hang up and urinate; and place that one again.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not stop the lead, it is possible that the urine which goes over this place, does not leave this lock.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	Then that child whose notch is straight is to be treated with a lead nail, as has been said, for three days within that it is increased.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	Then those in which the notch is not in its place, are to be led, that cause this because of these, that person who is born with the notch is the end of the head of the penis so that he cannot urinate within it, within that he raises the penis to his hand at its ends; and it is not to the generation, for so the semen cannot come to the mother according to rectitude, and it is a disease much.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	And the manner of operation in him is that the patient be laid on his back, and his head be extended by your left hand to the violent extraction, and incise the top of the penis at its end with the spatulum close, so that it is a cut of feather, or that you do not cut any part, within that his blood come out similar to the top of the penis and the notch falls into its place according to what covers.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	Then keep that your operation of the flow of blood, because as much happens to you; and pause with him at the water which stops the bleeding, and heal the plague within that it be healed.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter 61.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	Of the treatment of the whiteness that occurs in the prepuce on the head of the penis and of the corruption, blackness, and adhering of the prepuce to it.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	This whiteness occurs in the penis and is an eminence of flesh much.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And of this there are two: one is malicious and the other is not malicious.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	Not malicious, you shall suspend with a little subtile oil and stop it within that it be completely; then place on it, a little immersion in Egyptian ointment, then wash it, and heal it with the ointment every day within that it be healed.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if this whiteness is malicious, of a leggy color, then you shall cover that your cauterize is near the incision of it and its reason.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	Then if this whiteness is in the prepuce of the head of the penis, and one part of it is inside the prepuce and another part is outside, then cover that your hold on this which is inside at the beginning within that it be consolidated; and afterwards you heal that which is outside, because when you heal that person with a whole prepuce, it is not assured that it has been circumcised.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	Then this whiteness occurs in the testicles and in the prepuce, blackness and corruption, then cover that you capture all of that is already denigrated and is already corrupting or is already corrupted; then place a line on it with water, which is mixed with flour of scorsas of millet and of three parts and crivellated.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	Then place that person again with another treatment within that it be healed.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	Then if there is a flow of blood, then administer lunar cauterization according to this form:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	Because the cauterization that is useful is to two arrangements together, so it is to the flow of blood and to the plague when it is corrupted.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	Then if the head of the penis is corrupted and is destroyed entirely in the hour, then insert into its meat a lead tube within that the patient urinates through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adhesion of the prepuce to the head of the penis (and this adhesion does not occur except in that person whose prepuce is loose, and above it there is no circumcision required; and when adhesion occurs for plague or for apothermia) then extract with an obtuse spatulum within that it dissolve the liament and release the head of the penis completely.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	Then if it is difficult to remove those exquisitely, then cover that you extract with an obtuse spatulum from the head of the penis and from the prepuce, so it is because the prepuce, when it is subtle, is greatly pierced by subtlety gently.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	Then separate between the prepuce and the head of the penis with a lead of subtility, which is already much in the water that it does not adhere to anything else.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	Then be healed with vi stiptic within that it be consolidated.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter 62.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	Of the washing of children and of the treatment of water that occurs in those of circumcision.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution for continence even if it works with other plagues: however since it is our operation and our will, and its effect is proper to children, we must assign it to that operation and to the path of less loss to salvation.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Now I say that the ancients did not say circumcision in any of their laws, because they did not use it in their own laws, and it is only because we have acquired for experience, which causes this fact, that I have found most of the artisans and barbers to use circumcision and purification with new cuts and scrapings; and they use a ligament with great care and an incision with a scalpel.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And I have already found all these ways and do not find better purification with scissors, with a ligament with great care that in the purification with the unglue, because the thread of the foreskin goes up on the skin, and the skin itself is cut off, and it is painful to be forced into another incision and pain; certainly.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And the purification that is made with the alpe, and it is manual, of which the butchers use, is not secure in the incision at the end of the male member, because it is forced into the tunnel.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	But in the operation with the unglue, be careful not to force and corrupt your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the thread of the child is short by nature, and it is seen in such a way that there is no need for purification, and I have seen this.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	But of the purification that is done with scissors and a ligament, goodness, experience shows me that, because the sharpness that is removed is the same as the sharpness that is left; therefore, when you press your hand in proportion with two sharpnesses, and cut it according to a comparison at a time; and it is made by compressing the ligament with the shape containing the thread of the foreskin from all sides, and which does not make an error.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the way of the first operation is that you make the child stay mostly if he is small, and that you do not let him get up until the next day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	Then bring joy to all this way that it is possible for you to receive intelligence from him.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And then make the child stay between your hands or hide the scissors in your hand or on your foot, so that the child does not see those or anyone else's tools.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	Then put your hand on the child's foreskin and blow into it, and pull out what is inside the foreskin's head; then purify him from that which has been added to it by filth.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	Then double the marked place on the ligament, then tie another small knot behind it, and put the thread between two fingers, and hold it with a good grip, and cut between two ligaments.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then lift up the thread carefully and strip off the head of the foreskin; then let run a small stream of blood, because it is better; and sprinkle dust on it and on the dust put honey-coagulated cow's milk in fine water with a red olive oil; then leave him there until the next day; and heal that with cura.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The shape of the scissors for purification is this form:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	If the extremities are not sharp and the others are, so that the edge of the claw is not sharp, and the length of the two sharpnesses is the same as the length of two hands clasped together.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	But an error in purification is that it forces and cuts off the internal thread completely; therefore, you must cut it from the end of the member.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Then cover that with your hand on your unglue in front of the apostematico spot and cut it according to equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	If you cannot hold it with your unglue, then take it out with a scalpel and cut it.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	But if they have passed three days, and leave it that the foreskin is swollen from outside the appendage, then let him remain there until it softens, and take it out easily, and cut it according to what you prepare for him.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And keep the head of the foreskin away from him, because it will not be good for him.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	Then heal that with water which solidifies the plague of the dust that we have described in the treatise on dust.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	If the thread is cut from the end of the member and does not go beyond what is necessary, then it will not be seen by him.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	But heal that with water which we have said is to be cured.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter LVII.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	On the Purification of Urine Retained in the Bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is done by obstruction from wind or a cold, or from poison or fattiness, and similar to those that we have said concerning purification in the division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	If the urine is not dissolved and the bladder's retention is due to a wind that has already entered the neck of the bladder, then cover that with honey-coagulated cow' milk on your feet.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	Then put the child's feet on your lap and spread his abdomen above the height of your lap, and stretch the skin of the foreskin as much as possible.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Then, when the bladder is constricted and the wind is expelled from behind, so that the urine is voided.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	If the urine is not dissolved with water which we have said is violent; then prepare a syringe made of silver and fine leather, such as a pen point has, and a long cane in similarity to a palm and half, which is fine cane at its tip.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the way of sending urine through it is that you make the ligament double and tie it in the end with a good knot; then put the tip of the cane into the bladder, and cut with scissors if there is any surplus skin in the bladder' end; but put the syringe in the bladder with pressure and milk of cow.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	Then put the child on his back on a blanket, and place the bladder of him and the foreskin with oil; then oil the foreskin with olive oil and water.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	Then insert the syringe with ease into the end of the bladder; then double the foreskin from above the bladder and tie it; then push the syringe through that which comes to the cause empty, and do not do so unless it is necessary, but let it come out by itself in the way it likes.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	Then stretch the ligament little by little because urine makes the foreskin small.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Then expel urine and use a syringe; do not cease to make water and use a syringe within that is evacuated from the bladder and the wind is relieved by it.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter LIX.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	On the Quality of Bladder's Water with Clamshell and Similar Instruments.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When an ulcer or apium in the bladder occurs, or a cold is cut by a sharp object, and you want to distill water and medicines in it; then prepare an instrument called clamshell, and this is its form:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	but in its extremity it is deaf, so it is closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	and in that same time three: two from one side, and then five times.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	In the beginning it is a closed place, in which is stored that which is gathered there, and according to the quantity that it piles up there, six additions are made, until such time as when some cause is added from there, it is thrown out, and when it is expelled far away, according to what clings to it, naphtha is applied to the wounds of the sea.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	Therefore, when you want to throw out the water in the bladder, put the end of the clamp into the water, and throw at it that which is pushed there from above, for the water is thrown into the cavity of the clamp.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And then put the end of the clamp in the veal according to what we have just said about the ring; and push that water into it, for that water reaches the bladder so quickly, and also the patient's navel.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The form of the subtle crucible in which the bladder is Crucibleized, and it is that shape:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	it is made of silver or lead, which has the shape of a little feather, and place it very carefully inside.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	And then take a bladder that is in motion, and place the water you want to crucibleize in it, and put that between two strong ligatures, and heat that water over the fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And then put the end of the crucible into the veal.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And then place your hand on the bladder with the water that you are heating, so that your hand is over the bladder with the water that is getting warm, so that the patient' navel feels it.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	But if you don't have a bladder there, take a piece of leather and make a circle out of it; and pierce that circle all around; then put in it a strong ligature, so that it spins; and add the ring as it is added to the water, because you pause over that water that you want to gather the water, and sniff it, and drink it.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And then you ligature that in the instrument and make it with that as you have done with the bladder, and express your hand within that so that the water reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Chapter LXVI.
De extraccio de peyra.	On the Extraction of Stone.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already said in the division about the different kinds of stone and its treatment with medicines, and the difference between stone generated in the lungs and stone generated in the bladder, and the characteristics of each.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	We have also said about the stone that is operated on with hands, and its section.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And the stone generated in the bladder properly is that which is stuck in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And these are described with a clear explanation and a shortened version.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore I say that the stone generated in the bladder mostly goes to children; and of its characteristics is that the urine that is passed from the bladder is like water in its subtility, and appears in sand; and the lead rubs his arm, and it becomes hard; and in the water there are little pieces of stone.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And the recovery of children from that disease is accomplished within thirteen years, but it is difficult to cure old people.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	But in young people it is only half healed by water because it is among those.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And of that from which the stone is larger and the treatment is less effective; and if it is little, it is contrary to that.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore, when we come to the healing of that stone, at first we must make a cut in the bladder from which it comes out; for that cut prevents the spread of the disease by means of the urine.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And then let the lead be held between his legs and be pressed and heated until the stone descends to the lower part of the bladder, or jumps from one place to another.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And then make a cut between your hands prepared, and the hands of him who is to be operated on are placed on his sides, so that the entire bladder is moved to one side.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And then turn it over and move all of it.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	Therefore, if you feel the stone in the space, turn yourself over to the section on top.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if it doesn't come out completely from the left side by means of oil applied to the left testicle, if it is a child, or half of the right one if it is an adult, put that in his arsehole.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And turn it over so that the stone is on top.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And turn that stone little by little until you reach the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	And then press on it with your hand and push out that stone to one side after having made a cut there.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And order the minister to press his bladder against his hand; and order another minister with his right hand to stretch the muscles between the thighs, and on the other side of that minister who is to be operated on, apply a bandage to the place where the cut will be made.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then put in place a speculum so that this is its form:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	and cut between the buttocks and the muscles, not in the middle, turning towards the left side of the scrotum; and make that cut over the stone and the testicle, making a transverse cut so that the cut is wide outside and narrow inside according to the amount of stone that has been excreted from it, and no more, for it would break the testicle strongly if you cut it in the middle, since the stone will come out easily.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	You know that there is no stone whose origin is in the bladder; therefore, the passage of urine is difficult by water.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	The water from that bladder is like a drop of liquid, and it passes slowly by means of urine.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	Therefore, if it is that which has its origin in the bladder, place it in the crack.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not that way, turn yourself over on it, or stretch it with your hand in a gentle way, so that the end of it is towards you and does not slip from your hand; or put in its extreme end an instrument with a curved end.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	But if you can't turn on it, stretch that small trauc a little, and if you want to stop the flow of blood, cut with vinegar that has been diluted three times.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	But if the stone is more than two inches in diameter, at first put your hand on the opening of the bladder, and then cut it over; and then push a small bit of water; and make a mark if there are more than two pieces.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if the stone is very large, ignore that you cut it with a large section; for two things happen to the patient: either the stone remains in the bladder, or passes from the continuous flow of urine, but the location does not become completely solid.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	But administer it from inside that is outside, or put in a fracture of the lead with pliers within, so that it comes out in pieces.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Therefore, when you have finished your operation, fill the wound with aloe juice and dragon's blood; then stretch that lead.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And put on a cotton cloth in oil and vinegar, or in rosin and water that rubs; so that it softens quickly.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	And so return the blanket over his chest, and do not remove the ligature for the third day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when that has been removed, soak the area with water and oil, and apply the medicine of mercury and saltpetre until it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	But if the plague occurs with pus and it is similar to urine coming out from the penis, then do not enter it with your finger, for it could cause corruption of the bladder and putrefaction.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then wash the plague with vinegar, water and salt, and in opposition to anything, apply water that has been boiled to it until it is healed.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And when the hours of the cure are completed, both cushions are placed and the medicines are applied that were suspended over the area.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	If the pain is small and it is in the middle of the testicles, and it has become stuck there, it is forbidden to urinate, then treat it with water that you have boiled beforehand, for it is said that if you do not boil it, it causes sezation; and if you cannot boil it, then drink it, and this is how you do it:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	with a triangular point, taken, placed in a pipe.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	And then put the finger inside it, and leave the pain there so that it does not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And then insert the iron into the testicle, piercing with ease until the piercer enters that pain.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And then turn the piercer towards your own hand in that small pain little by little, and you will pierce that pain from the other side, for the urine is soon discharged.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	And then place your hand on it that is on the side opposite to the pain of the testicles, for that is where the pain is removed, and it is healed because urine passes through; and the patient is healed.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	But if this cure is not suitable for you because of some reason that prohibits it, then put the finger inside, and another finger outside the pain.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And then cut on the pain in that testicle between two strips.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And then take it out.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	And then remove the ligature and dry off the blisters that are on it.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And it is not necessary to put the finger inside, but so that it does not return to the bladder, and the other ligature outside, for when the finger is removed, the urine comes out of the pain, and the pain returns to its place.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And it is necessary for you to raise the ligature outside when you put the finger inside, or that it returns to its place from which it was removed, and it heals in that way too, as I have said.
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter LVI.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	Of removing the pain of women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Pain in women is rarely engendered.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	But if you have pain in any of them, the cure is difficult, and it is forbidden to touch it with your hands.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of theirs is because the female is strong.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	The second is that you do not find a woman who discovers if she drinks what she should not when she is pure, or if she is married to a man.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third is that you do not have an educated woman who knows this art well, more often the operation with your hands.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	The fourth is that the place of sezion on women's pains is far from the place of pain, so as not to suffer sezion by accident, and in that it is forbidden.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	But if necessity compels you to do it, then return that you take a married woman who knows this art well, and few are found.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	But if you are deprived of that, then seek married women who are wise and subtle, or present a wife to a woman in the business of women, or a woman who practices this art well.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Therefore send that woman to you, and command her to do all that you order, from the inquiry about the pain until it begins; which causes her to look whether the woman is pregnant, then return that she says what she has said in her womb, and desires the pain.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Therefore if she returns, send that woman away from you, and then command her to write on it.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	But if she is not pregnant, then command the wife to put her hand on the left side of the bladder and feel it, and touch it gently with her right hand.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Therefore if she returns, send that woman away from you, and then command her to gently touch that opening of the bladder between her hands, and feel it with her fingers until she touches its root.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And then write on that position of the middle of the bladder until it is stopped and centered in that place, and the sentence of the woman from that part is to her side, and the word of it is not to be turned back from that pain with a gentle movement of hands.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	The sezion is to be little at first; and then put your hand on that sezion, and if you feel the pain, then adjust the sezion according to the quantity that you know that the pain causes it to be moved from that.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	You know that the flavors of pain are many: for some are small and sharp, and some are long and round, and some have rashes.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Therefore you know how many flavors there are of it because you understand that sentence which you want to make.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you want to see the flow of blood from a wound, adjust the place where it is painful and hold that woman for an hour before it stops bleeding, and then return to your operation until the pain is gone.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And prepare those instruments for you that are mentioned in removing the pain of men, so that you may be helped by them in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you want to see the flow of blood from a wound, and you know that the exit of blood is through the opening, then pause dust on the place and spread it with powder and tighten it, and do not repeat that; and leave the pain, and do not extract that water, for a strong person will die.
E aprop cura la plagua.	And this cures the plague.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	Therefore when the sharpness of the pain is passing, return to your operation until the pain is gone.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter LXII.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	Of sezion on hernias caused by pain.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	Achyous hernias is nothing but the addition of moisture to the blade white that leaves the ring of the genitals containing the water, and it is called Ciphac.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And some are in the proper padding that is naturally prepared by nature on the side of the blade, before it becomes a separate blade, and that is the ring of the genitals between the Ciphac white that we have said, and it is not water but salt.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is by means of which that happens to the genitals, so that it is poured on this substance, and some times it is caused by striking on the genitals.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this moisture is not of many colors, for the color of it is either turning to yellow or red or brown, or black that is turning, or clear and white, and it is water that is most.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which this addition of water is known, for if it is in the Ciphac white that we have said, then it is round and slightly turning towards length as the shape of a horse, and there are genitals, because the moisture contains all parts.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the moisture is in the skin proper, then the pustule is readily formed with the heat of the fire and thus one supposes that it is another fire.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the moisture is between the skin of the genitals and the white ciphe, then do not touch the centimeter.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And if you want to know the color of the moisture in the pustule through its opening from which the form is preceded, and according to what comes out of the trace of the opening, judge from that what is inside it.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	So when we come to the treatment of it by fire, then command the patient to be sweaty if possible, and sometimes wet his clothes.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	Then have him sit up on his heels for a little while, and pause the bleeding with a few bandages.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And have yourself sit on the left side of him, and order the minister to follow on the right side of him, which will spread his blanket on one of two sides between the genitals and the mirabile part of the belly.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And take a sharp knife and cut the skin of the genitals from side to side along its length within a pentile.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And the section should be made according to the recipe evenly distant from the line that you should make the skin of the genitals, within until it reaches the white ciphe completely.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And remove it, and observe, and keep yourself away from it; and your removal of it on the ground that it is removed by fire may be suspended up to the heat of the fire, and carefully examine the removal according to the quantity as much as possible.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	Then pierce the white ciphe all over with a wide piercing, and extract all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	Then separate the two sides of the section with your fingers, and extend the white ciphe on its edges; and do not touch the skin of the genitals together, and cut the ciphe in that way that is to your possible.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And cut it all over or in pieces, and most importantly its left side, because if you do not scrutinize carefully the cutting of him, it is not secure that the water does not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	But if the fire is drawn from that side of him by the skin in the hour of your operation, then when you have completed the section of the ciphe, return it inside him, and then join together the two sides of the skin of the genitals with sutures, and then treat him as well as other plagues, until he is healed.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you suspect that the fire is corrupted by another malady, then command that they take away the vessels that are suspended from him, and extract him, and then treat him with water which we have said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	But if the water is gathered in two parts, then know that two are hernias; so cut that part according to what you have done on the other side; and if it seems to you that it is an operation, then do it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And then do not abstain from the salt, and immerse the section in oil or rosin-oil; and pause another cloth that you have immersed in vinegar and oil, and spread that over the mirabile part of the belly; and pause open bandages and herbs, and lie down on your side.
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	And then have two bandages and be humped with wool according to this appearance; and let the extremities be pressed with something of a coat or wooly cloth, and let them be added to the garment in the bra-garments, and one extremity take from behind the shoulder of the shirt, and the other from the edge of the panty, and two extremities over two cushions left, and two extremities on two sides, and all the stricture be adjusted in the garment of the bra-garments.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	Some of these hernias are treated artificially by cauterization instead of section to be removed; and because you make cauterization with a sharp knife and cut the skin of the genitals, and it is ignited according to what we have mentioned, until you uncover the white ciphe containing the water, and then you make cauterization according to this way:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	And it is gathered in a Greek letter.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	Then pierce the ciphe with it, and ignite until all the moisture be driven out.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	Then extend the ciphe with your fingers, and cut it with a sharp knife, and cauterize it by igniting, and cut it according to what is possible until you remove all of it; and keep yourself away from the fire that the flame does not touch.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And know that this operation is safer and more distant from the flow of salt, and better than an operation by section.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	But if you have contrarian symptoms of pustules in the hour of section or in the hour of cauterization, or flux of salt, then command that you cure those symptoms which are opposite to it by treatment which is said according to that.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	But if the patient is a little bit fearful, and does not hope for the second operation because of its horror, then administer piercing according to what I have mentioned here; and it is only confirmed by what we have said about the signs that this hernia is watery.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Then command that you place the patient on a high table, and pierce the pustule at its lowest edge with a sharp knife, and pause the piercing according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And make the opening wide until all the water is out.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	Then pause on the place of cauterization and leave it, so that the water is driven out by the burning.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	Then treat him until the plague is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	But if there is contrarian to the flow of water in that hour that you pierce it: and water is not made except by that white pannicul at the orifice of the plague, then command that you introduce into the plague some or other instrument with which to extract the water from the liquid; or fix a small one in the shape of the plague.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And know that water returns, and is gathered after months or years; and when it is aggregated, then pierce according to the manner in which we have said, because the patient will thus live through its days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter LXIII
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	Of Section on T issue of a fatty hernia and the Treatment of It.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	And know that in section on this hernia is lost to harm by the most ways; and for me it is a matter of sight, and to be saved by that one is better.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And I remind you of the operation in that way and the symptoms of pustules.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	So, say that the pustule bursts in the sides of the genitals where they are joined, and it is caused by excessive heat: or by impact.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And it's the color of the abscess according to the color of the flesh, and it doesn't turn red in pain, and it's a hard abscess.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And a thick abscess is easier to cut, whose color is dark and not hot.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And some veins are cut by the knot of the arteries, and by the swelling of those already felt, or by the swelling of the veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	May be that it's because of the swelling of the arteries is known by the disappearance of the abscess when you compress it with your fingers and do not touch it.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	May be that it's because it's cut by the swelling of a vein, don't touch it with your fingers.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that this kind of surgery be performed if the genitals are cut and the blood vessels are separated from them, and extrude the bladder from its supporting structures, and free those vessels, and you sever those supporting structures before you extrude that one from all parts of the bladder.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	So if the bladder is already united to those flesh with blood vessels, then do not touch it; you extrude the bladder and sever it.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is adhesion between the bladder and some reason, or between that one and the vessels, then do not touch it; you sever all those adhesions with a round incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	May be that there is birth of flesh in the location of the adhesion, which is behind, then do not touch it; you sever all that one and extrude the bladder in this way, as I have said before.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	So when your operation is completed, then fill the wound with wool soaked in rose oil and apply the other cure within, until it is healed.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter 48.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	Of the treatment of hernia that is with vitriolic acid.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	It'a an abscess wrapped in a wrapping similar to the softening of the testicles, and it is difficult to move or walk on the patient' thigh.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	In the treatment of this disease is by fear for the water from which the memory recurs.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, if you say surgery in that one first, and then in the second.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And I say that you sever the patient' thigh on a raised table, and then sever the supporting structures of the testicles at their bases; and have other servants hold those ones who are to be cut with a sharp knife, and extend those ones towards me.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And then sever them with a sharp blade in a transverse incision on the right side of the vessels where they are exposed.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And then cut off all parts as I have said before in the removal of the arteries that are in the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And then place one needle with double thread on the first of the places where it happens vitally, and another needle in the last of their positions.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And then cut those in the middle of their locations with a right-handed incision according to the length of the body and extrude that one that is joined to foul, corrupt humors.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And then cure the wound with a cure for other wounds that you want to heal by falling the vessels of which one cuts off the two testicles, because it is not good in case of water.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	May be that it happens vitally to all the vessels; then the testicles are cut off or made void by the cutting of the vessels, so that they lack nourishment by the incision of the vessels and die, or so that they do not grow by their being cut off.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter 65.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	Of the treatment of hernias in the intestine.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The coming of this hernia is by incision which is in the middle of the belly from side to side of the navel of the miracle of the belly, so that going out of those buds of the rupture comes to some of the buds.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture is either of the abdomen or from the rectum, and it happens for different reasons: by percussion, by sound, by a cry, by a sudden raising for some reason, or by similarity.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	And the sign of this is that it happens slowly over time and not suddenly, and it'a an abscess within the abdomen from where the rectum comes out, because the ciphac compresses the budel.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the sign of this is that it happens by incision in the abdomen because at first it causes sudden, sharp pain; and it'a an abscess on both sides of the navel as if it were cut off, and the body falls apart from the abdomen.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And sometimes the bowels are forgotten with the budel, and this hernia is called entestral zyrbal.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And sometimes it happens with a bulging belly, and sometimes it runs in the budel' fissure, and here is kept, and is causing great pain to the patient, and sometimes bad or strong pain when it is pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	In the treatment of this disease with iron is by fear, so that it is avoided in that one.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And the way of performing surgery on this is that you order the patient to turn his belly towards you with his back turned if he returns to his normal position, and then place his feet on your shoulders.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And then cut the cord that connects the testicles to their bases, and sever them all along their length; and then place two sharp knives on the incision according to what you want to eat to cut the incision with those ones.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if there is a quantity of that one that can be taken from it, and it is possible for you to cut it off.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And then cut off the cord of that one whose end is joined to their bases, while it'a a hard white cord from each part.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	Then you sever the testicles by cutting off the end of those ones that are between two hard cords, and leave the cord of the patient' thigh, and sever the adhesion between the patient' back and the base of the testicles.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And then sever the cord of the testicles to their bases, and stretch out the white cord on its left side with the help of a servant, and lift the patient' thigh towards that one with the help of a servant; and command those ones to stretch out the patient' thigh on its right side and cut off the end of the cord.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And then search with your fingers that there is no cause in the abdomen wrapped in a hard white cord.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	May be that you do not find any reason for it; then place that one on your belly from below.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And then take a needle that is very thick and sharp of three threads, and insert that one into the back of the cord at the end of the base of the testicles, which is cut off by incision; and then sever those extremities of those ones that come out from that one with four threads, and then tie them in a knot on a shape like a circle; and make a hole in it with your fingers; and place that one on the patient' abdomen.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And then tie those extremities of the threads tightly, and sever them with a sharp knife within that one whose end is joined to the base of the testicles in order to prevent any reason for it to cause an abscess.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And pause another piece of string according to the first string, a long three times; and put these two pieces together leaving a loop which is the length of the testicles' girth in proportion to their size, and mark all round it with a roundness, and cut off the end.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	Then cut in half the loop at the point where the girth of the testes ends, making a section which will serve as a guide to cut the testes in two parts at that point, so that they can be separated as we have described above in what we said about this.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	Then give them water to drink, and pause at the edge of the pool; then give the string that we have described (and some of the white loop is cauterized, which we said should be cut in two at the edge where there are signs of bleeding, because blood may appear) and leave the string inside, so that it falls by itself.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	May also be delayed, then cut the water off, and pause until it is dry, as we have said above.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	Then cure the pool with another type of medicine, until it is cured.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter LXVI.
De hernia ventosa.	On Ventilated Hernia.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernial case, nothing has been seen to have been done to cure it by applying fire.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first one said that it should be done as we have described in the case of a hernial pain that is felt acutely; which is to say, cut at the point where the sensation is acute, and then let the wound heal by itself (by leaving it open) until the swelling goes down.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	Then cure the pool as we have said, until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter LVII.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	On Disroption in the Anguire.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Some break in the anus as we have said, and then clean out the area.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And do not examine the rectum for any cause of the bowel; and if they do so, there is little to be gained from it; and return in a few hours.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	May also be prolonged the time with water, then a small incision is made in the loop (the hernia) inside which the bowel should be pushed; and this causes it as we have said, because the loop is stretched, and then becomes soft and clean out the area.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the cure of it is done with a pointed cautery as we have preceded the description of it.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And some are cured with fire according to this method: and it is because the patient scratches his back between your hands, and then cleans out the area of the rupture of the anus by cutting along its length in three inches; that is to say, one inch at a time.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	Then stretch out the white loop that hangs down below the testes, so that it is exposed.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	Then take the rope and pause it over the spot where the loop hangs, and press it with your hand on the belly.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	Then cut the two spots that are at the end of the loop, and join them together by sewing one to the other.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	Then cut off the end of the rope, and do not cut into the loop at all; nor extend the foot, nor any other cause as we have said above in our description of how to cure a hernial disease.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	Then cure the pool with the method described above for curing pools, and if you cut the skin, clean it out and restore the pool until it is healed; because the loop contracts and does not fit the protuberance of rupture.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cauterization is better in this place, because it is closer to health.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter LVIII.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	On Softening of the Testicles.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	In some men, the testes are softened by water because the flesh between them is softened, and that is why it is necessary to be careful with it.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Then it is necessary that in the case of the cure of it, the patient lie down on his back, and spread out the testes according to their length, and then join them together by sewing two lips together; and then let him rest for three days.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	Then if you wish, cut off the excess of the softened testes with three or four cuts and make a firm stitch.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	Then cut between the sutures, and then cure the pool as described above for the case of other pools until it is healed and the skin falls off.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter LIX.
De castracio.	On Castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	You should know that castration in our law is prohibited, except for a reason that can be shown to me; and I do not need to remind myself of it because there are two ways by which it is done, both of which are necessary for the sake of science when questioned about that case in which the cure is applied to them before they die; and the other way is that we should have needed to castrate other animals for our own benefit, as in the case of horses, cattle, and pigs, and similar creatures.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	Then I say that castration is done in two ways: either by cutting off the testicles or by cutting them open and removing them.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	In the case of castration by cutting off the testicles, the way of doing it with an instrument is that you should prepare the animal in the water until the testes are softened and made small; and let them hang down.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	Then take them by your own hand within your body, so that they are tight and do not appear to be loose with the touch.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	In the case of castration by cutting and opening, cover yourself with the animal, and press the testes of it with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	Then tie up the suspension, and cut off one end, then join them together by sewing two pieces of string together.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	Then cut those in half, and you will soon see which are the most painful.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not examine any of the testes, except for the subtle one that hangs down over the vessel.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	This method of castration is the best way, because it is done with a strong hand, so that no cause remains for the animal to desire to copulate.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	Then cure the pool until it is healed.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter LVII.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	On Hermaphroditism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphroditism in men is due to two causes: the one is because the space in the testes is divided between the testes of a man that resembles the figure of a woman because they are both male; and the other cause is because there is no division between the testes of those who are hermaphrodites, except for one testis that resembles the female figure because it is round.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And some men have a urine that comes from the testes.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	In women, there is only one: and it is because the shape of the vagina over the penis is like that of a man with two testes that are small compared to the other.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	The cure is made by three methods: by two of the men and one of the women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And it is because you should cut those parts that are adjusted within their limits so that they do not cause a problem for them; and then cure them with the method described above for the case of other pools.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	In the second species of men from which you get a urine that comes from the testes, there is neither cure nor operation in it.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	On Lensing and Flesh coming out for Women.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	A strong lens is adjusted above the natural causes until it is sharp, and is corrected by eye; and some women have been enlarged in such a way that they look larger when standing as men do, and are confused up to the point of incest.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Then you have the option of lancing your hand or arm or two fingers and draining them.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not finish in incision, mostly on the skin of the heel, so that it does not cause a flow of blood.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	Then properly cure those with plague before they are healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	May blood born is blood that stays in the mother's belly until it fills it, and it is strong to come out from the buttocks according to its appearance (and for this reason I originally called it "malady of the heels"); so then we must lance it like we do with lancing and cure those before they are healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter .lxxii.
De curacio de alratica.	Of the Treatment of Gout
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	It is that the skin of the foot not be pierced, or a small hole be made.
E es o natural o accidental.	And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental is if the gout that preceded it, and that is caused by either tight meat or a subtle cicatrix or spice.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	It is made either in the heel of the mother or in the sides or in the upper part of the foot or in the lower part, and strictly prohibit lancing, piercing, or pregnancy, and strongly prohibit menstruation.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	And the knowledge of that is gained by considering the shape of the foot, if the opposition is apparent, then probably; but if it is not apparent, then you must examine it with a sharp instrument or a ray.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	But if opposition is by a subtle cicatrix and is between the two lips, then you must cut and break it.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And place dust on both lips, and place the fingers that indicate the two sides at their ends.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the woman be on her two feet, with her cushions extended, and place both lips together with force until that subtle cicatrix is broken and opposition is revealed.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	Then return the lanced area to the place, and rub it with oil, and put a bandage on it, and let the wound heal with the bandage in place for that place is not healed.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	But if the cicatrix is thick and spicy, then you must lance it with a sharp blade or a leaf of mint.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	But if opposition is by meat, then hold that area with oil, and lances it.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And put on those medicines that stop the flow of blood with their biting, as well as pain from dragons and poison, adjusted to white wine.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	Then administer a wide silver needle so that the plague is not spread quickly.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	Keep it for several days and then administer a hot poultice.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	Then properly cured with the second cure of consolidation until it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And sometimes in the mother's birth of other animals, and then you must lance according to this way.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	But if it is for the cold foot, that cold foot in the mother is not caused by being placed in any way.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter .lxxiii.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	Of the Treatment of Hemorrhoids and Swelling and Redness that Occurs in the Foot of Women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids are the appearance of small veins that come from the orifices of the feet until they cause pain constantly; and if they become old, they are called hemorrhoids.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And I have said in the division about the spices of those and their characteristics, and direct like those that receive treatment and those that do not receive treatment.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Then I say that hemorrhoids and swellings when they are in the heel of the mother and do not appear on the surface, then in those is not caused treatment with iron.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	But those that are in the orifice of the mother over which there is a feeling, then those are treated.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	Then put the woman in a mayo that rubs, and extend those toes with scissors or a sharp knife, and lances them with razors.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	Then sprinkle on those the dust of one of the powders that cause pain with their biting, as well as pain and resemblance to others.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	Then hang those feet for an hour, and then place them in hot water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the pain persists, then make that foot boil in a solution of salt and vinegar and pepper and resin.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	Then return flour to the bread and rub it with honey and vinegar, and make a plaster with water on both feet.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the pain has disappeared, then it is good; and otherwise, make an incision between the toes, and cut off the toenails.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then return the lanced area to the place with a solution of colander or yarrow or honey, and make an incision in the place; then cure that place with a hot poultice until it is healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	But if the foot is too sore to be cut, then you must lance it where it appears, according to what I have said in the division of swelling.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then cure that place until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter .lxxiv.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	Of the Accidental Piercing of the Heel in the Mother.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	And various kinds of bruises occur in the mother, such as cold and painful blisters, ulcers, and skin diseases and pustules, and hemorrhoids, and swellings; and other bruises.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have said about these diseases and their characteristics and the treatments in the division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	Then I say in this treatise of the treatment of hemorrhoids how it is done in the mother, if you want to know how the operation is performed with iron.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Then consider if the pain of the bruise at its beginning is acute with percussion and fever, and sometimes it becomes swollen; then you do not lance that, but cure that with water that helps until the acuteness of the pain subsides.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	Then you must make the woman lie on a couch that has two cushions; and she reclines on her two feet and adjusts her legs to the side of her belly, and places her knees apart, and holds her feet away from her body, and pours water on them as needed.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	Then the woman follows behind and administers the instrument with which it is properly lanced at the orifice of the mother; its shape will be in those cases that you will make it fit.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And then when you want to administer this instrument that you hold it in your hand with the heel of the mother, and the instrument enters into the mother until it reaches the heel, and all the back.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	But if the instrument is larger than the heel of the mother, then you must place dust on the texture of the heel of the mother so that it does not enter the heel, and strictly prohibit the entry of any instrument into the heel of the mother.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	Then place the juice that runs in the instrument on top and make the minister hold the instrument and turn the juice until it reaches the orifice of the mother.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	Then when the excitement is over, and it feels cold and wet, then you must dry that place with a sharp blade.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	Then when the pain has stopped, then you must place on the wound a hot poultice in rose oil or green oil, and let the poultice cool in the heel of the mother.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And place the mother on the fifth floor and above the penile, a clean wool is dipped in water that has been bubbled with lavender.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then it should be washed twice a day with water that will make it well-watered so that it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And some are washed with the mother and the plague, which is crystallized in water and honey, and return to the dip, but the water should not be warm.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the plague is inside the mother that has been dipped, then you should not be forbidden from treating him with fire, but care for him in water that I have mentioned in the division.
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter .lxxv.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach the matrons how to bind a patient with an unusual pain according to the natural figure.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	A necessary cause is that the matrona recognizes in the beginning of the natural figure of conception by signs of him, and it is that when you see her to express in the parts, and she desires to smell the air, and above that is attached to him who is on her, and hurries to put it on her head, then know that this part is a second-natural figure, and it is his expression over his head, or suspended or hanging from the navel.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Then when you see those signs, then know that his belly is troubled so that the embryo expresses lightly because when it is put on his head, put the second one, and it is separated from those superfluities with good purification.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu .i., o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	May that which is another of this part be unnatural and unworthy, because when the embryo is put on his feet and his body is put in front of his head and his feet, and the mother's hand is one, or at his breast. Or it is put on his head and the mother's hand, or on his belly, and hard it has turned on her neck, and resembling the natural figures of him that are unworthy.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	A necessary cause is that the matrona is wise and subtle in all those things, and that she guards from error and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And I will show you all the figures of them, and which is good in those things because it should be understood by water and stand on him.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the embryo is put on his head by natural excellence, and that one is violent over the woman and makes a difficult part, and sometimes the virtue of him has been weakened, then he should make those signs, or let the women have him, and evaporate his sweat with fenugrec and olive oil.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And the matron should put between his legs a small cloth and pinch it with her fingers until the sweat that is in him comes out by moisture.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press the belly of the woman until he expresses the fetus.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	Then if she does not express, then know that the woman is cristallized with a tuft of wool and a tuft of fenugrec in a coverlet.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And let him cry out, that he be pressed and make those signs; and with his nose and mouth for an hour, because the fetus sometimes gets tired too soon.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if the two more of the fetus are crying out at the beginning, then you should bring those down with small steps gradually.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	Then if she does not obey the instrument, then pause her on a bench and lift her feet up, and bring the bench down on the ground; and let the woman be held so that she does not fall by the impact.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the more are not inside and the fetus falls down, then cut those off and take out the fetus or tie it to the mother' hand with a rope, because that one is tired too.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	Of expressing the embryo on his feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	And when the fetus is put on his feet, then you should push those forward, and make that one big, and make him small, and take a foot of him, and stretch those little by little.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	Then when they are put inside the clothes, then you should command him to squeeze himself, and make those signs; because he is tired too soon if God wills it.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if he is not tired by the water that I have mentioned, then return the small fetus little by little until you make the second natural figure, because that one is tired too soon by the expression.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is forbidden by all the water that I have mentioned, then take a tuft of wormwood and a dissolved gum, and pound it all in a mortar with good beating, and pour out into the woman's navel, the upper part of her belly.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And then make that hole in the water that is strong, so that it captures the hypochondria.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	Then when the parts of him are lengthened, then make him smoke with mint and hold off from him.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	Then when you smoke him for an hour, then place him on a bench, and make those signs, and open his mouth, and take off those parts, and press the lower part of his belly with light compression, because the fetus is tired too soon.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Of expressing the fetus on his feet and his hands.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the fetus is expressed in this form, then you should put its feet little by little; and the woman should be leaning on her neck, and his hands should be below, and his legs should be above, and his feet should be joined together.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And then press on his belly little by little, and take out him who is from the feet of him from the armpits within that it be prepared for the lower part of the fetus.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the fetus is not tired out, then take his feet and move them with violent motion, and then press those that are on him little by little until he can express the lower part of himself.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And then put its hands on him and squeeze him little by little, and order the woman to squeeze herself within that the fetus is tired out.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Of expressing the fetus from side to side with one of its feet.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	Is to be taken by the mother's hand, but if you cannot take it, then lift the woman up and make her go.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	Then if she cannot walk, then make her lie on the ground, and press those hard with a violent impact, and administer with equal steps those that I have mentioned.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if the birth has come, then make those signs on a bench, and study on the reduction of the mother, and take the fetus in the second natural figure, and make the woman sneeze, and order her to squeeze herself within that she is tired out.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Of expressing the fetus on his neck with its feet above his head and its back above his mother' head.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	Then know that the mother should hold him and turn those small ones little by little, and do so with ease.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	Then when it is turned and has been engualled, then pause over his navel the water and the mucillages that I have mentioned.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And then order him to rub himself little by little, and when he has done it, then make those signs on a bench, and order him to lean on his right side, and order him to be pressed; and make those signs.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	The exit of the fetus is prepared for the left side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When they begin to be horrendous with this method, consider, and then you should incise the second with your finger until it is emptied of moisture.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if that which is suspended over the neck comes out of its cavity, then you should incise it from the navel so that it does not hang and die.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	Then place the baby inside, and send the woman to squeeze herself tightly, and let her be delivered gently, if God wills it.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	Exits of twins or fetus.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Know that twins may come out as well, and sometimes three or four, but this is strange for them to do it; there are only two causes for this, either by nature or dead.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And count those, even if they are multiplied, one after the other, and distinguish between them by their shapes, there are some that come out with an umbilical cord around their neck, and some that come out with a navel, as it is natural to do so gently; and some that come out with a navel, as it is not natural to do so.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if they are difficult for them to be born and reach water that I have spoken of as not natural, then you should take care of those in this way.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the woman is subtle and makes water that facilitates and subtlety, and delay, and it is invented according to all the shapes that are prepared by the engineer towards salvation.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Remember that it is formed in the matrix from embryos and is aborted.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Some are formed in the mother’s womb, and there are two, three, four, and five; and already have I seen that a female will abort six, and another ten, at all of these forms, which causes to be made by measurement of the glorious wise men.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all that comes out is that which is in the science of the woman how firm he is to that little similar water, and therefore stops going out to that water where it stops.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter 76.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	Of the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you take care of the dead fetus to the water that I have said in the division of medicine and it does not come out by itself, then force yourself to use surgery on her, because you consider if the woman is of good health and is not an accident for which she is a waste of loss.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Then consider that the woman is lying on her back, and her head is tilted down, and her legs are raised.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	The minister should tie it with two knots or bind it on the back to prevent the person's chest from expanding too much during the extraction of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	Then you should moisten the mouth of the mother with cold water, and with a mixture of mint and fenugrec and a mixture of licorice.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	Then you should rub the woman's back with those oils and mixtures, and then put her in a comfortable position in the mother, and then seek a place for the nails of the fetus.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	A convenient place: then consider if the fetus is prepared to put it on her head, and then you should fasten its nails in its holes, or in its neck, or in its mouth, or in its palate, or let it grow a beard, or in the angle of its back, or in places close to its ribs, or let it grow hair on its chin.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	Or if the release is over his feet, then in the palm of his hand, or in between the ribs.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	Then he should hold the nail with his right hand, and place his hand in a comfortable position, and fasten the nail in one of those places that I have said, until it reaches the cause from above.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	Then you should place another nail in the appendage of him, or three if necessary, to prevent it from slipping and only being attached according to its receptivity.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And if he should die suddenly from all of this, that his exit is eased in the same way as it comes out naturally.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	In the water between them that the exit is softened; and if any part of him is retained, then consider that the woman should rub a little oil on her, and put it in order and turn it around with water that has been retained.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Then if the exit of the fetus is blocked, let the nails be swapped in a place that it is easier to put them on; and do so that all the exit of the fetus is blocked.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	And if the woman is exhausted in front of the other one, and it cannot be reduced by twisting him, then consider that he be wrapped around him; and then take off him from there until all of him has been removed, and cut him at the joint of his hand or in the back.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	Then consider that you make two cuts on the other woman and on her feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	And if the head of the fetus is big, or if it occurs that his neck is twisted in his exit, or if it is above water, then consider that you put between the two points sharp and cut off its head, and extract the water, or separate him with an instrument called "unwinding", the shape of which will come to the shapes of the other instruments in the chapter where this one is mentioned.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And apparently make it if the fetus is a big head by nature: and then consider that you cut it with a knife, or hold it with an unwinding, as I have said; and then take out the bones with tweezers.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head is already out and twisted at its neck, then consider that you cut it from between its points with water that is poured on its feet.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	And if it is not complicated, and does not exit by itself, then you should cut its head as soon as possible according to your ability.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the one in the womb is deformed or is in the water, then consider that you pierce it where the moisture flows out of it.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	And if the fetus is over its feet, then its attraction is easy and its direction to the mouth of the mother is also easy.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	And if the fetus is twisted at its belly, then consider that you extract it with cloth, and consider that you cut its belly where water flows out of it.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	And if the other members are still alive and turn around the head, then consider that the woman puts her left hand; and if the mouth of the mother is open, then put it in the palm of her right hand, and fasten its nails in its hole, or in its neck, or in its throat, or let them grow hair on its chin.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mouth of the mother is closed by an apoplexy that I have spoken of as causing it to open, then consider that it does not cause trouble over it; before doing so, consider that you pour a lot of liquid water.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And administer emollients; and follow the patient with water that softens and moistens him.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the fetus is over his side, then consider that it is twisted, and consider that water be administered as I have spoken of in a live fetus.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if water is not possible, then he should be cut into pieces and extracted.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And so that there is no cause left inside of the second.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed all your operation, then administer the medicine which I have said about the cure in the apoplexes cauterize the wounds which happen so from the mother.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if there is a flow of blood from the wound, then let it be washed with stiff water and administer the other cure.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And I have already seen a woman in her womb who was with child, and another woman was conceived upon that body, and another dead body was made on it.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It happened to the woman after a long time an apoplexis in her womb; and it swelled within her that body which was with child, and it began to burst.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And I was called to the care of him; and I treated him for a long time, and the plague did not become established.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then I stopped doing certain things that cause strong attraction to him, and I made him eat an apple, and after a few days I made him eat another apple; and I was astonished very much, for in his womb there was not any apple.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	Then I thought that they were the bones of the dead body.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Then I cured the plague, and extracted from him some bones, the woman who was in her own womb, and it happened to her after a long time, that she had a little child in her womb; but then it was not yet born.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And I did not think that strange, because in that body there is science and help to the medicine which the doctor prescribes by administrating it.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Of the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the dead body.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Form of turning over by which the mother is turned over:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of strength in which the bones are bent, and by which two virgins are tied to two feet of a dead body.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	And this form of strength, may it be that it is put subtler than the other, and made or of ebony or of pine wood.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And be the length of each stick two palms and a little more, and the width of each at its middle, so that the length is greater than a palm and a half, and the width of each is less than a palm and a half; and in place of two sticks there are two joints of the same wood, which are joined together, their length being a palm and a half and a little more, and their width being a palm and a half and a little less.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two additions are used to open the mouth of the mother, so that it is opened to what you turn the two prescribed virgins.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Another form similar to that which I have just described, but more subtle and lighter:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	Let it be made of ebony or pine wood according to the appearance of forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	But in the end of him are two additions like those which I have described before, and their length is a palm, and their width is two palms; and at the extremities are two joints of the same wood, which are joined together; and they are shorter than the other by a little more than half a palm.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to cover the mother's body, then turn it over so that its feet hang down, and make a space between the legs;
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	And open your hand to the instruments in such a way that they are joined together according to how much you want the opening of the mouth of the mother to be smaller than the medicine which is to be administered;
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of turning over by which the virgins are tied:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	The form of driving by which the dead body is driven:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	The form of contorting by which the head is twisted:
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is put together like pliers, the form of which I have described before, but with different teeth; and some apoplexes are made by this form as well, but more gently, to the end that the head is twisted.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	The form of contorting a little:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	The form of un bending by one hand:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	The form of un bending by two hands:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	The form of pliers by which the head of the dead body is twisted:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	The form of a staff with two extremities by which the head is cut off:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	The form of two staffs that are joined together at one end by which the head is cut off:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All of these instruments are put into practice, and when they are very little to the medicine which is to be administered; it is necessary that the doctor be very skillful in his operation, and that the servant who assists him be strong.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And do not open any of these instruments; for it is not excusable that you should use them.
De extraccio de la segondina.	Of the extraction of the second:
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	And when the second is kept, then do so that it does not come out; but if by doing this it comes out in a violent way, let it be so.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if not, then you take a bowl and pierce the lid with a sharp object; and press it down on the mouth of the mother in such a way that the leaves of calamus rubrum, of camomile, of marjoram and of St John's Wort are pressed between them.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them are submerged in water in the bowl; then place it over the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And place a reed cannula in the mouth of the mother; and let that water evaporate into the cavity of her throat.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And make the second one come out quickly with a blow; but let the first one come out slowly.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	And if this cure does not become established, then command the mother to dip her left hand in olive oil or in a mixture of marjoram; and put it on the stomach with a cloth; and if the second comes out quickly with a blow, let it be so. But if the second is attached to the womb, then place the first one that you have described before, and when it has been found, take it away little by little according to the method which I have said for the mother not to get attracted violently.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	After turning him over so that his right side is up and his left side is down...
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And then be adjusted in the amount of attraction, for it will obey and avoid adhesion.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mouth of the mother is closed, we have already recommended the cure with salivation and medication for the fever with herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	But if it is not forgotten with all the causes that we have recommended, then keep in mind that you do not rub on that area of abstraction, but rather cover it with a cushion and place it under her; and then apply the treatment to the mouth of the mother with vinegar and tetrafarmacon; for that will putrefy it within a few days and dissolve and forget it.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	But when you are finished, it is an unpleasant odor to the head and to the stomach, and the bad taste remains; so that it is necessary to administer sub-fumigation and appropriately to water.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	But some of the Ancients have already used sub-fumigation with nutmeg and dried figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	Form of instrument to which the female is sub-fumigated in order to prevent menstruation and to prevent a second:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	be made of glass or brass.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And the narrow end be placed in the navel and the wide end above the fire; and sub-fumigation be applied over the flames of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And let that be consumed with sub-fumigation and repeated again.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	Of cure for the child's anus without perforation
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	The children who do not have their anuses pierced are subtle and delicate.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then the midwife should pierce with a needle the child's anus that is subtle; and if not, pierce it with a scalpel deeply, and be careful that it does not touch the urine.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	Then return to that wound in veal wrapped in linen and oil; and then treat with salve inside that is soothing.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	But if you fear that it will get worse, then wait for 3 days and stop the child from defecating.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And already happens oppilacion of the anus for consolidation of plague or abscess; then that consolidation is engraved, and then be treated with water that we have said for the cure and tar.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	Of cure for the fistulas that are caused.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistulas that cause pain in the anus pus is located and treated with a massage that is soft or in the space between the buttocks.
E es una fistula o motas.	It is a fistula or it hurts.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And with this massage, the pus is old and runs with watery blood or subtle putrefaction, and some of these are fistulas that penetrate.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those that penetrate are called by water that comes out from them and by wind; and some have used the bed of egress, and strongly is it said to come out from them.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And those are the fistulas that penetrate into the bladder, and into the meat of the thigh; and those that penetrate into the joint of the leg, and into the knuckle of the foot.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And in water that is conogued from a fistula that penetrates into the anus and not, it is because you put the child's tongue in the anus, and carefully try to push a needle or ring in the fistula when it does not hurt.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	But if that is painful, then carefully try to push a needle or hair of the horse into that area when you feel the pain or the hair in the child' tongue.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel that one at all or there is no discharge of blood or wind; then it does not penetrate and the cure is finished.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the meat of the thigh, then the meaning of it is that urine comes from that and prohibition to urinate while applying medicine to that area so that it does not get worse.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	But if it penetrates into the joint of the leg or into the bone and causes pain in the circulation of the leg, then the meaning is that there is blood in the urine and pain in the circulation of the leg; and that with time there is putrefaction; and that does not respond to treatment, nor does it get better with salve.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all these penetrating fistulas there is no cure at all, and the cure of them is a waste of time and effort of the doctor about which they are foolish.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	But in that one that is not penetrating and does not hurt, healing with iron is expected according to what you have recommended, and that I have already said and practiced.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And it is that the mother walks between your legs two and raises the legs of her, the underpants are slanted towards her abdomen, and then carefully try to push a needle or ring into her when you know the place where she feels the pain.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if that child feels the mother turn her back, then return to the child's tongue with a massage.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	But if you feel the pain in the child' tongue through massage, then certainly that one is penetrating; and if not, do not work on it, for it is not in that cure, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	But also they say that it heals quickly in some men.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And of the cure, by which it is expected to heal quickly in men, that you use a subtle cauterization according to the width of the fistula; and then carefully apply the fire to the fistula where it feels hot; and repeat this two or three times within the fistula so that you know that it has all dried up.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And then treat that one with caloots wrapped in boughs within the fistula so that all those parts that are affected get well, and if it does not heal, then do not wait to heal it with another cure.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if the pain enters and does not penetrate into the anus, which is in the buttocks, and between that and the pain that is slightly a smell of meat or of wax; and then cut the skin from the start of the fistula with scissors, and dry the flesh from the start of the fistula, and if you feel pain, cut the flesh again, and it will be free.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And then disassemble those fistulas that are made of meat that is joined to a cane of ash and do not interfere with any other cause.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	But if the sweat flows between you and your surgery when you touch those parts of meat, then use a hot instrument to cauterize with fire or with acute medicine, because cauterizing with fire is very useful in two cases: first, it does not hurt those parts of meat that are close; and second, it stops the flow of sweat from those parts.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And then treat that one with caloots wrapped in thistle within the area where it is swollen, and then treat the fever with medicine for the birth of the flesh and to consolidate it.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And those are medicines that are used for strictness and excision; when you have cured it, it is healed and there is no need to worry about recurrence.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	But if the fistula already penetrates into the pit of the anus and it is long from its surface, then carefully insert the child' tongue into the anus and feel with it.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And so if you have to reach between yourself and her where it is smooth or of flesh, and is prone to penetration, then there is no operation for it except by way of confidence and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	Which causes it to administer in him one of three ways: or that he cauterize there ayssily with what we said; or that he severs that part within which you can get the cavity so that it is possible for her to reach and cure by the means propounding; and do not perform a section because you will not cut the lacuna containing the bowels, and arrive at the side of the body according to your will; and appropriately heal that which we said that fortly cures; or that he elongates that velament and makes that pus that sever that part within which you can get the cavity by the means propounding, as we said, with an attempt or another instrument with a sharp end, and then cleans those fistulated meats whose part is in the section within the bowels; and then tries to make the restoration of all the wound by section, and if the orifice pus above does not consolidate, and it breaks the fistula open on the side of the buttocks, and then pull lighter through the malaute.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And some are cured by this way: when you introduce the attempt into the fistula, and it is in the buttocks side near the surface of the body on the cord and at the margin of the buttocks, then take an attempt of sharp end, which is so as a needle to prepare the bodies according to this form:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	and reaches into that envelope wrapped in 5 fields or enters between them; and then reaches an attempt at the fistula within which you can get the cavity.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	Maybe if it penetrates in the side of the buttocks within going out, then you take the envelope from there as you introduce the tieu said in the buttocks; and you pull out the end of the envelope and adjust the two ends together, and stretch each one, and let it rest there for a day or two, and when more you insert the envelope into the flesh, stretch that which is inserted between those two ends of the envelope and they fall.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And then cure the wound within which has consolidated and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	Maybe if the orifice of the fistula does not penetrate, then you make it to pierce, in whatever way you prepare, but that it is made by the way of confidence, because it is not for you to do so as not to cut yourself on the bowels; and then make it within that is healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The form of the hook that is split: its curve is sharp and the other side is not-sharp, so that you do not cut yourself there which it is not necessary, as if times.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	of suturing of hemorrhoids in those where runs blood in the incision of those.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Emorrhoids also according to two ways, because either between the buttocks resembling grass, or those are with fat of lard.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And of those are so small and great, and that the blood runs from them always, and is one, and so many, and outside the buttocks, and in the extremes of him.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	Maybe however those that are outside the buttocks are according to two of few moisture, from which runs yellow water or a little blood according to continuous body part, and according to the color of the body.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the cure of that which is within the bowels is that you order the malaute to sweat and squeeze, so that the bowels burn and the hemorrhoids appear to you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you hide and hang yourself on a hook or what you have with your nail, and then cut those hairs of their roots.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	Maybe if the nails do not have them in those by the humidity of them and their softness, then take them on a sharp or dry cloth or a sheep's wool, and pull out them with the nails, and cut those hairs of their roots; and then cut them with scissors at the base, so that they are at those instead of cauterization; or cauterize them according to what has been preceded in the chapter of cauterizing.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And then cure those with the other cure, so that they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the buttocks do not obey to exit, then cross the malaute with a cross in the part that is mordicacio small, and is washed by the water that is in the bowels and which obeys to exit slightly when the malaute is crossed.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	Maybe if the hemorrhoids are outside the buttocks, then the cause of them is slight, and it is because you take them with your nail, or that you take them with a hook, and cut them, and then cure those with water that we said within that they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And that which you want to make an incision, follow this way of administering: take the envelope wrapped and introduce it with a needle, and then pull out the emorrhoids at the ends thereof, and then make the incision in the middle of the other side, and wrap the two ends of the envelope around the incision, and then let go; and so turn the incision around.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And do it completely, and leave one of them uncut, so that the excess blood runs from it.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And then place on the buttocks cloth in oil of rose or in wax; and then place that which has been cut on the bowels, and orders the malaute to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then you leave those within which it falls; and when it is fallen, cure them with oil or with another cure, so that they are healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	of the cure of fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Some things come to pass by excision of a wound or by nature's contraction.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And although they are very ancient and do not have the medicine, then you make those with the point of a hook or with your nail within that they are made moist and is host of them behind, which prevents their consolidation; and then cure those within that they are consolidated.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Then you make those with a razor pushing forward so that the first incision that hurts is made, and then cure those within that they are healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	Of the cure of an ulcer, thus it is done.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	Know that it is necessary to wait, thus it is done, and it is not unless you notice a redness according to the color of the body resembling grass at the roots of the hair, which is made throughout the whole body, but mainly in the extremities of the legs and the hairs, and then from there by those go the pains; and these pains are felt for those.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And then follow this way of administrating: take those that are cut within the cycle of the clove, and make them with the forceps or a hook, and cut them out from their roots; and then cure that.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you want to, cauterize what is next according to what has been preceded in the chapter of cauterizing.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	A small wart is a small round hard growth on the surface of the body, and some times it appears on children's hands.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	The cure of him is that you stretch and cut those, or that you make those with a hook or within which it falls.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you want to, cauterize it according to what we said, by fire or acute medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	Then they are eradicated backwards and forwards with the instrument that I directed you.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	A tickling is a small flat wart on the surface of the body apparently of little moment, and it stings like a mosquito; and it is made by going around the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	And the cure for him is that you take a syringe from an awl or a bolt, and make it strong, and place that over the swelling until it contains the circle of the syringe's exit from his thigh; and then turn your hand around the syringe until you pierce what is in the circuit of the swelling, and place that on the front of the flesh, and drive out the swelling from its root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, do it with a syringe made of iron or steel according to this form:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	So that the exit of the syringe is small, dull (if it is not pierced), wrapped in such a way that on its side it is heated and the revolution of that one.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you want, cauterize the swelling according to what was said before in the cauterization of athymine on the cap of cauterization.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	Of the form of the instruments that are administered to give کریستال.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Some swells are given crystal of silver or brass or melted or hammered; and some swells are given those small instruments and large according to those on which they are administered, because what is administered in the treatment of small children is small; and of those whose swells are painful or painful, the crystals of them are small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of large and small crystal:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The cap of the syringe' side to which the bag is attached according to this way; and is at its distance the place where the bag is attached so often.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the end of him that is further away, which enters into his buttocks, be dull  (if it is not pierced) with a lion's mouth, turning to the right and turning to the left; and on one side of its length there are two turns, and on the other side a turn, and the width of the turn according to the thickness of the rays and the smaller one.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And be the bag in which are placed the medicines of beast' bladder or sheep' hair, and the root of him is a palm.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And be pierced with sharp turns as it is turned over; and if the space between the turns is large or narrow.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And insert into those sharp turns a strong thread of cow' milk, or among those; and adjust the bag to it; and when it is placed in him the bag, be straight in the cap of the crystal between two distinct and strong constriction, and then cristalize each turn: But the quality of crystallizing each turn is that you fill the bag with medicine, that it be heated according to the tolerance of the patient; and guard that it not be too long or too short.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	And place the patient on his back, lifting their legs up, and pause them a cushion on which the men are already present or a bed sheet; and approach those two fingers to the swelling with ease, and the minister takes the bag and squeezes it with two hands and expresses it rapidly so that it is discharged into the swelling until what is in the crystal is all discharged; and then remove the crystal and the patient lifts his legs up to the wall.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine forces him to excrete, hold it as long as he can; and if he sleeps for an entire night, it is better to wait a day or two.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	But if you crystallize him in the patient' stomach soluções for constipation, then return to the crystallization until he is healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if in the buttocks are hemorrhoids or painful bumps, then be the crystal small and sharp of a lion' mouth, of the crystals with which children are treated.
De curacio de las plaguas.	Of treatment for the skin.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	You already know and have said in the division of treatment for the skin that it is appropriate to free them, and I will say as well the treatment of those with a disease and medicine according to the remedy.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore I say that the skin diseases are diverse according to what causes the rash and according to the place where it occurs.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes that produce rashes are: from drinking water, or cutting with a knife, or stinging with a lance, or a dagger, or an arrow, or similar to those of insect bites.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	But the rashes that occur in the body are: those of a rash on the head, or neck, or foot, or stomach, or groin, and similar to those of limbs.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And I recommend treatment for some skin diseases in order that you consider the reasoning and rule on other skin diseases.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And I will begin with simple skin diseases, because the memory of the composed will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Therefore I say that when it occurs in the head a simple rash and is not broken, then consider: if it is from drinking water or similar, and you have already taken some medicine, so wash your head often with cold water, and do not delay doing so; and extract the liquid from the wound according to the quantity of its virtue if there is no further cause that prevents taking cold water, more so if the rash that is cured is little.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And be the cold water of the opposite part of the infected skin; and keep the patient from eating or drinking anything thick.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	But if there is no cause that prohibits it, then reduce the food and do not bring it close to meat or drinks.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And pause on the rash, if you have broken out a rash, apply a hot oil of rosewater or only in the wound which is stiffened.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	But if you are sure that a rash will break out, then pause on the skin, if it is new and the air has not changed the powder that I recommend you put on slightly.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed that powder, then pause over it covered with a cloth until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	But if the rash is large or it is from cutting with a knife and similar, and their lips are not close enough for the sutures, then adjust those to the sutures as I recommend:
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	But if the rash has already broken out from the bone and is not retaining anything but a little liquid, then cut that off and cure the rash with medicine and restore the flesh back to its original place, ordering the patient that he eat only vegetables: cheese and eggs in small amounts, and bread and water, until it is healed.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you suspect decay in the flesh and it does not adhere to the bone, then cut off all that is rotten and wash it with water, and then cure it.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	But if in these plagues is an artery or a vein through which blood can flow, and it is not cut off by medicine, then inquire about the artery, and if you suspect that rash is not cut off, then cut it with a scalpel, or burn it; and if necessity requires that what I have said does not suit you, then cauterize until the blood is stopped.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these plagues are simple and small, then the cause of them is slight; and in any case, you put on powder on those, for it has already hardened from before the air changes.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	And the way of the powder is this: take oil from a rose, two parts of dragon' seed, three parts of an unknown cause; all three are ground together and sifted, and if there is a rash filled with pus, and it is held tightly by a good constriction until it coagulates with the blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And then tie that above the powder and leave it, and do not untie while it is still there so as to not be infected by it, because medicine does not come into contact with it until it has been healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And sometimes he makes water only when it is necessary and there is no pain in the present case or dragon's fire.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And this surgical operation is done on the large wounds when it is necessary that they be stopped above those and straightened out, and the recent wounds have not been altered by air.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has altered them, especially when it is summer, do not place this powder in position, but rather cure those with water that we have mentioned, or put a layer of flour on them with water and honey so as to prevent them from being corrupted; and then cure them with the other treatment until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	But if it happens that the fracture in the wound is small and in an bone, then extract water with a sponge.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And direct the cure of fractures of the head in water that is poisonous.
De las plaguas del col.	Of the wounds of the neck.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	But if the wound occurs in the neck, there is no difference in treatment, and between the head wound when it is simple.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	But if the neck nerves are injured or arteries, then if they are nerves do not use a treatment with water that causes strong tightness, so as to avoid injury to them because it is similar to vinegar and resembling them because it does not affect nerves and does not cause pain.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not place anything on the wound that causes a sudden stop, because the substance of nerves is lively and their continuity goes up to the brain, which is pus from all members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if water is used that is cured with light medicines, so as it is washed with warm water, some mixed with rosewater or not, and then dried when it is washed with warm water and the other ones with mint water according to this way, and rubbed with oil.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	But if the wound is large, then administer stitches, or bind the lips together, and then cure that with powder until it has been healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	But if the wound is deep or has occurred in the lower part of the pus that has been corrupted, then pierce it in the deepest place.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	But if the wound is already an injured artery and there is a loss of blood because of the pain, then separate or dry that, or tie it up, or cauterize it if necessity forces you to water.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the bones of the jaw are broken and all of them, and the veins of the neck are saved, then you adjust the lips of the jaw to stitches over the joint of the jaw and do not touch that; instead, remove those and reduce it to its natural figure, and tie it tightly with a strip, and leave it for some days; and then cure it with oil in which there is stiffness and excitement until it has been healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	But if the wound has already caused destruction in the bone, then strike it, and then if there are any bone fragments, extract all that you can; and water that is not covered, leave it until the wound heals, and separate it and wash it clean.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the wound is recent, then sprinkle powder on that powder that I have recommended to you.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	But if the wound has caused a fistula, then cure that with water that the memory will come to you in the Seven Churches.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Of the neck wounds or similar when they occur between the shoulder blades and are caused by a knife or a lance or similar.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a knife or a lance that has caused the percussion and the depth, then consider whether there is wind in the patient' breath; know that the wound is deadly.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	But if there is not depth in the wound and it is recent in the patient's time, then at first place powder on that, and do not tighten it so as not to be painful because it does not reach the bottom of the wound and returns to the heart, but pause for two days with water-based oil and then remove that.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	If the oil that you have does not come to you at the moment, then pause in the orifice of the wound with a cloth so that it sucks water that has been there; and make the patient sleep on the wound so that it runs water that is inside it.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	But if three days or more have passed since the wound occurred and there is no spasmodic pain, tremor of the heart, or tightness in it, and other good dispositions of that, then know that the wound has been healed; and then cure that with oil and water until it has been completely cured.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	But if the healing of that is delayed and it has been open for a long time, then know that it has already become a fistula; therefore, cure that with the Seven Churches.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the wound is caused by a knife or similar and it is simple on the surface of the foot or leg, then cure that with water that has been preceded by stitches, if it is large, or powder, if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	But if the bone has been destroyed and all of those bones are separated, then you will turn the wound over to extract those bones, if they have come out.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	But if they are not separated, then leave them until the wound heals, and extract those from them easily.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And for the other wounds that occur in the other members, the improvement in treatment is the same as we have mentioned.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of the wounds of the belly.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The discomfort that occurs in the abdomen is great, small, or moderate.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	With the large wounds, there is an overlap of intestines or nerves of the intestine, so that they interfere with each other and their stitches are very strong and subtle.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	A small disruption is difficult to manage in any way, and if you do not extract the intruding of them to their location soon, it will be very difficult because they are covered with a thick layer that makes them difficult to manage.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And the best disruption is moderate, because in that wound the reduction of intestines is not difficult, and it is difficult in two different spices that have been mentioned before.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And know that the stitches for the abdomen are second to four ways, but two stitches are common that are added to the stitches of the other wounds of the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	But two more proper stitches communicate with the other wounds, but only one proper stitch is used in the wound of the abdomen.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And I recommend to you each according to exposure and declaration.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	So I say that when the wound is small and there is no intruding of the intestines into it, and it is difficult to reduce that, then water is one of two ways: either by the slight disruption of those or when the intestine becomes swollen by the cold air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And so when water is like that, then take care not to cut it too much because you might submerge a sponge or wet cloth in cold water alone, or take it into warm water, and cook the intestines with spice, salt, and pepper, and mix them with the intestine until the swelling has been resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	Some water contains stiffness, and it is better than cold water in resolving swelling.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And so when you find the swelling has subsided, then moisten the intestine with water in which it is wrapped and soaked, for by doing so the instrument will be made easier to move because of a few causes.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	If it is not necessary to remove the instrument from the body in this cure, then cut out the rupture with a small instrument which has been carved into the hemorrhoids.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And the first cure is better when it is proper that it is not a section, and it is not an occupation to cut off by necessity and malnourishment.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Regarding the instrument, consider its shape:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One part of the instrument is sharp and acute, and the other not-sharp and not-acute, and its end is subtle, and it is not at the subtlety of a needle, because its point is obtuse, a few little.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And so when the plague is increased and the intestine comes out, then cover that its reduction is according to the shape of it naturally, in its proper place, if it is possible on it, because it is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	But when the rupture is wide, and it is in the lower part of the abdomen, then place the patient on their back, and pause their legs as high as possible above their head; and if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then place the head of them and their feet higher than the legs.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And apparently if the rupture is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then pause your intention and your consideration at all times so that the part in which the plague is located is higher than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And so cover that you administer it in the great and small plagues.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in the small plagues, let it rest that you prepare it, and so that the minister is between your five fingers, which has all the rupture with its hand and ajustes the lips of it, and so discover from this to that which sews any cause appropriately another.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	This is the common way of suturing: one in which you take the needle, or consider the needle according to the amount of the width of the plague; and then lay down the end of the rupture of the little finger, and tighten the needle a little more than you enter into both ends of the knot, both the ends of the thread that are inside the knots, so that it enters from this part; and you have added two ends of the knot and two ends of the thread, and then you do four orders.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And then tighten the needle a little more by the thread of the two ends, and add some ties of both parts, and then add the two lips and the plague by addition; and then lay down the thickness of the finger and take another needle, and so join this with the thread at the first needle; and do not stop doing this if it is necessary by the needles until you complete all the contortion of the plague.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And let the small needles be between graciosity and subtility, because the subtle needles cut with difficulty the flesh; and the thick ones are of difficult instrument in the knot, and so that by this they are less in subtility and more.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And do not consider that the needle is fixed in both ends of the knot next to each other by doing this, so that flesh is not cut with difficulty and the plague is not sheltered before its consolidation.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And do not be prolonged in the suturing so that the plague does not hinder the consolidation.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And so cut the ends of the needles that they do not remain attached to the patient at their sleep; and place over the expanded sutures of all parts, which have the ends of the needles; and leave them within so that you know that the plague has already been consolidated.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	And these kinds of suturing with needles are more convenient in small plagues, because it is enough in the suturing of them a needle or two or turn those away.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	But the second suturing is more convenient: and it is that you administer to suturing the four ends, of the knot and two ends of the thread, in a single tie, with the needle wrapped around in subtility and thickness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And when the needle has passed through these four ends, reduce the needle from that meteyssa part of which it begins, so that the thread retreats by the lower end of the needle to enter into the next upper end of the plague, so that the suturing is according to the suturing of drapes with which the draps are strenguted.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And place between each suturing the quantity of the thickness of the thread half.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this suturing pleases men.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And on this suturing I have cured the man who was affected in his abdomen with a knife, and it was the breaking of the plague that is greater than a palm, and the rupture at the middle of the limb, and so I reduced that which had been broken for twenty-two hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the plague has been consolidated in the space of fifteen days or so, and I cured that one and it is healed; and so here I am returning to my work by doing this, and it has been discussed in its considerations.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And the other wounds had been healed that it was not healed; and by a miracle it happened, because I did not cure that one with gargles, because it was in a place where the water is not attracted nor any medicine is administered, but so I placed on the wound a cloth two days later, and washed it often with water of honey within so that it healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	Then you made two special sutures according to the narrative of the Gospel.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And it is that you begin with the suturing of the knot, and introduce the needle from the outside part to the inside part.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And so when the needle penetrates into the knot and in all parts of the body, leaving the end of the thread for doing this, then introduce the needle from the outside part to the inside part; and make the needle penetrate from the outside part to the inside part of another part of the body.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And do not consider that you have made the needle penetrate once, then make it penetrate another time in the same part of the body; and leave the end of the thread for doing this, and so make the needle penetrate from the outside part to the inside part of another part of the body.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And make it penetrate with that penetration that you have made to penetrate the needle in the knothole at the end; and so make the needle penetrate from the outside part to the inside part of another part of the body.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And then begin from this side of the knot and cut that with the knife at the end; and so take the needle from the knot which is in the other part, and so return it to the knot and cut that with the knife at the end; and so bring out that needle from the knot which is in the other part.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And make it a single tie and another, and make it a single tie proper other within so that you cut all that is before according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the sum of this way of suturing is that you cut it according to the suturing of hair; and so you cut the ciphac a single tie from the part of the end of the knot, and so you leave that other tie within so that you complete it.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	But the second special way of suturing is that you cut it according to the suturing of Gules; and this is of speech of him and for him considered, it is that you add all part to his own part in a convenient way by nature; and so they apply the end of one to the other of them, and so it is done according to what I have considered.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	Now you will find the first needle at the end of the mirror to your opposite side, and insert it into the opening from the inside out, leaving two ends; then turn the needle and insert one end into each of the two openings.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	And then return those caps, and make the openings from inside to outside in two opposite directions on each side of the mirror; do this with another needle.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	This type of stitching is better than common stitching, and it is the same method I have described earlier in memory.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the speech of Gualia
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And they may call it "gualia" stitching of the belly is done with two needles, so that you put in place a thread, and start the needle of one side to go into the other according to the stitching of those who sewed them together;
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And you should know that when there is a break in your belly, the stitching of it becomes more difficult than that of other areas of the belly.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	The judgment of medicine to treat plague is the same as for the other plagues.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	Which causes it when you can reach the recent plague with a stink before the air affects it, and reduce the intestine and tie it up properly; then place your hand on the area of powdery blisters.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already affected the plague, then place your hand on it to soften and break up the blisters, so that they can be easily removed, and cure it in this way as one does for other plagues until it is healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	And if you do not have any medicine with you, then place your hand on it for a long time, because it starts to hurt, and changes color, and may turn blue; then instruct as necessary, since you will not need other medication in this case when the plagues are simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	And if you fear that the common plague might spread to the main members, then find a piece of wool that has been soaked in a solution of rose water or olive oil; place it on the affected area and leave it there.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if you feel pain or putrefaction in the intestines, since it is clear that it has arrived there, then apply a violet stain to it, and most importantly if the putrefaction has reached the intestine and it is coming out.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And you should know that the one that comes from the large intestine has a different cure than that of the small intestine.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	It is difficult to heal because the one that is called "gegunu" does not receive the cure of plague that affects it from all sides; and this is due to the great number of veins in it, its size, its subtlety as an organ, and its proximity to nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	And if the one you are treating is a thread, and you reach it recently, then follow the same instructions for reducing intestines in general.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	And if it has passed from there and has become dark and green, then place a thread on the area where it is infected to cause blood flow; since it is veins and arteries in this place.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And then cut off that other part of the thread, and place two ends of the thread hanging from the opening on one side of the affected area; so that above you is relieved the attraction that causes the plague to flow; since it is due to the blockage of veins and the escape of the fluid.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Memory of the plagues when they occur in the intestine.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When it occurs in the intestine and is small, it is possible that it will be restored in some people; because if you see a person who has suffered from this in their belly with a lance strike, it is the plague of the right side of the stomach, and the plague is old and made a fistula, and its discharge and ventilation.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Then you see that the cure of it has not been carried out properly; but follow the same instructions for reducing intestines in general until it is healed and the area is consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And you see that the area has been consolidated, then place a covering on the affected area of the patient's belly; and do not change it unless there is an accident of nature in their legs, drinking and eating, and exercising themselves in their baths.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And it has been said by experienced people that when there is a plague in the intestine and it is small, then find two large cheesecloth pieces; and adjust the two lips of the affected area and place one cloth between them; then, when you put the two hands on the area and apply pressure, cut off the end of the cheesecloth, since it adheres to it and does not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	Then place another cloth in front of the first one, and do not let it fall, so that there are two cloths between them; and continue doing this with more cloths according to the amount of the plague.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	Then reduce that area and treat the affected area; and let those caps be attached to the intestine until the intestine is healed; and do not harm the patient in any way.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	It is also possible that the intestine be tied with a thin thread that comes from it, since it is made of meat; and if you take hold of the end of this thread, and it is small and sharp, then place the tip on the end of the intestine; and wrap it in a thread, and tie it up properly; and reduce that area.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	This stitching method with cloth is a reliable and trusted way to heal the affected area.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	And if the plague is large and widespread, most importantly since it affects the small intestine, because it does not heal properly; and it will only get worse with time.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	Of treatment of plague by cauterization and fistula.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	And you should know that any plague and pustule when it has grown and is old, and becomes a wound, and is not consolidated and gets bigger all the time; and does not heal, then in any member it is called  "zuchem" generally; and we call it a fistula.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And the fistula according to truth is a feutrada nodacio, hard, white, and painful area that feels hollow when touched; and therefore it is called  "rizat" or "pain" in that area.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	It is a wet fistula in some people, and it gets bigger; and the humidity is secreted strongly in certain hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And sometimes that moisture becomes dry, and it is little, and thick, and subtle.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And you may have seen it in the past; but now I will tell you about it: when any wound does not heal and is not cured with medicine, or because of the nature of the area affected; or because the wound has been infected by a pestilence; or because the food that is eaten is bad for digestion; or because there is corruption in the region, and it is difficult to cure the wound; or because the wound is an open sore on the skin, or because there are bones exposed in the area.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	They have all been shown, and I will repeat them: from the nature of the wound that does not heal; to the type of medicine used in the treatment.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And so that you may know the cure for the fistula, which is performed by surgery without an incision.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And know that the fistula occurs in all parts of the body; for from those it penetrates into the veins and arteries or nerves or liver or bowel or bladder or any of the ribs on either side, or to any of the joints composed by union of the main member and the foot; and from those is what gives proximity to the main member and similar.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And therefore of those fistulas that are according to this manner is of the difficult curatives and not receivables, and occupation to them is work and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if it is any of the fistulas whose depth does not reach these places that are said, and wait and trust in the cure of them, and want to come to knowledge of them, then try to cut or pierce, and if the fistula runs according to rectitude, and inquire about it with them.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	More if the fistula is tortuosity, then investigate it with a slight lead, for lead by its lightness of the body is relieved and curved from the tortuosity.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula has a horrible motion, it is not in your power that you can say about it to try.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Then seal the opening by means of the opening, for the moisture that you seal that opening goes to the other openings and runs away from them.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And then inquire carefully, according to what manner it is possible that you can know if here are bones or nerves, and is the hollow of the fistula distant or proximate, or is a fistula to which there are only openings and is over this much as the whole of your strength, in the encasing of the patient's lower body, and the discovery of the cause of the swelling deves your compression on the back with the foot, and similar for the significances and the causes of the accident at the apoplexy.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have put yourself in place on all these causes with care, then go to the cure according to confidence: and it is that you consider then if it is a fistula that appears proximate or in a place of salt, distant from a joint, or of nerves, or of an artery, or of a vein, or of one of the places that I told you.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then you clean the fistula according to what is said in front of it, and this water that is in the filtration and腐敗的肉，和从肉生出的穴，或类似之物，并治好它。
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	More if the fistula is of great depth, and it runs according to rectitude, then cut that opening as much as possible, and wash those completely with rotten meat; and put in there wrapped medicines sharp, and introduce them into the hollow of the fistula, which you have understood with iron.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And put there a few drops of sharp medicine that corrodes all that is rotten in the hollow of the fistula from corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	Then restore it with healing enervates, where they grow healthy flesh within that is cured.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	More if it is not cured by water, then you cauterize that according to what I have recounted.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	More if the cause of the fistula is bone and it is necessary that you make a cut on it according to what I have said, if you do not forbid any cause of a vein or of a nerve or of a main member as I have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	More if the bone is discovered by you and it is in its some corruption and darkness, then you cut that part where the corruption is complete; and put in there water that heals it within.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it is not cured and becomes larger as the fire does, then you know that you have not arrived at the total eradication of the corruption; and therefore you discover about it secondarily and carefully find the cause of it and wash it with the last strong medicine, and restore it.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And therefore if it is cured, it is good; and if not, then you know that the corruption is in the depth distant of the body, which has not been achieved, and therefore on it there is nothing but to cut that.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the bone is corrupted little, or is within your power to shoot it with a forceps that can be done to water.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if there are only bones, then carefully make an extraction of all of them, and leave none without a cause for your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	More if you find that there is an opposition for some causes of humidity, and in their incision there is no fear or mistake, then cut those bonds or meats if here are any, and free the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	More if you have not prepared the cutting of the bones for your hour, then stop on that opening water that can be found, and leave it within that is surrounded by those bones and bonds, and keep that water that has not been consolidated, and be forced to make a cut that you have made in your operation.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	Then if you are afraid, pause over the crotch submerged in vinegar, or crotch submerged in Egyptian oil, or one of those green enervates, for when they will be poured out those bonds, and the bones are separated from each other, and is relieved by that attraction.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	More if it is a large bone like the bones of the back or legs or similar to those, and water that is corrupted by it is the face of it alone only, then cut that one with a sharp knife only behind that is surrounded by that blackness and corruption, and restore that opening.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	More if the water that is corrupted by it is a great mass, and corruption has already reached the bone marrow, then you make an incision all around that part where the corruption has arrived, and put in there medicine sharp, then heal that opening wherever it has arrived; and cure that within that has been healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I recommend to you water that goes into a man in the crotch for him to put on it as an example and assistant on your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	A young man of about 30 years of age, who experiences pain in his testicles and has a large swelling inside the body that reaches into the scrotum, and from which the matter is discharged into the scrotum, and this matter is pus with a great abscess, and not to him by an extrinsic cause.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And then extend the time for that opening with error of the metges within which the abscess is large, and quickly put in it matter pus, and your cure is postponed until the crotch becomes fistulated, and its orificis are all small openings that they give pus and moisture from the body.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And then your treatment is many types of metges around two years, and not in those who have wisdom teeth, within which I was called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And I saw the crotch of him and the matter running out of those openings for a great distance; and his body was completely trembling, and the color of his body was yellow.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then I put in the attempt in one of those openings and went to the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	Then I searched carefully the orificis and found which ones come out of all the parts of the crotch.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then I hid myself and cut into one of the orificis where I discovered a part of the bone, and turned that which was corrupted, and it was already rotted and broken and discolored; and it was already rotted a part of the crotch within which had penetrated into the mesentery.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And now I had discovered and prepared what was hidden for me of the skeleton.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And I judged that it was not in the bone but that corruption which I had discovered and prepared, and I had already removed it.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	Then I paused the restoration of the plague with medicinal consolidatives for a long time, and it was not consolidated.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And I iterated again and discovered on the bone secondarily on the first discovery, and I continued to discover corruption on the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And I had discovered what was hidden for me of that corruption, and I had prepared to perform its cure and restoration, and it was not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then I discovered another vein and did not stop to cut the bone little by little particularly and pierce its restoration, and it was not restored until I cut around a palm of it, and that I extracted to the marrow, and I continued to restore it with medicines, and it was consolidated somewhat and healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And there was no need to iterate in the operation of it and cut it again except for the disposition of its fever and because of the lack of tolerance of it and fear of death, since it happened in all hours from excessive evacuation of bad syncope.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And so it healed completely, and there was nothing in its place of hard bone; and it returned its virtue to it; and it became converted into its own disposition and did not cause it contrariety in walking or damage in any cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	But if there is an eminence of bone in place of the body then cut it as follows: and that you take it carefully and stretch that at the end of that eminent bone, and command someone to extend that at its end; and pause that carefully of a thick wool of the first one; and bring that close to the flesh that is left of the bone, and stretch the end of it so that you draw the flesh to the parts that are left, and you discover the flesh on the place which you want to cut so that the saw does not hurt the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	Then a table or bench is left of the bone properly: because when you do that water is not forbidden to cut which does not hurt the corrupted flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And that the sawing be on the place of corruption little by little because if it is in the concave of the bone and does not appear in its appearance to the sensation, and forces the locking of another vein.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is corrupted and not eminent, advance one part continuously to the other, and the corruption is at the place or in a part of it, then you discover all the flesh; and pause a table left, and bring that close to the place of corruption properly so that the locking of the other part is continued.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And let the sawing be according to the place of corruption a little, as I have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is in the joint, cut that corrupt joint, and saw the bone where it continues from the other part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in reason but invent.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the chest of the body or the foot, it is difficult; nevertheless, when you ask about the corruption appearing in what way to you, and cut that, and shape that according to each disposition which is possible for you, and according to each invention is corrected to you, so that it does not cause you contrariety coming or nerves.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And you know what tools are for cutting these bones are very different according to the situation of the bones and their preparation, and the thickness of them, and their subtlety and size and their smallness and their hardness and their rarity; so that you prepare for every operation special instruments suitable for that operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And you know that this operation requires for you the kind of instrument which you need; and for you it is great study and long and careful consideration of the methods of this art, and witnesses of methods of misfortune, because then you have already experienced through your own suffering what is convenient for each instrument in all cases of misfortune.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And I have taught you in the end of this chapter the number of instruments which you will find simple, with which you will perform your prohibition which you will experience on the others.
Forma de serra:	Form of saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Other saw shape:
Forma de autra serra:	Other saw shape:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Other large saw shape:
Forma de ray:	Shape of a knife:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	May the head of this ray be according to the shape of the star's head, and the points of it are according to the shape of the points in alstefegi.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And do not suit but that they are crushed the heads of the joints when they are rotten, or is a large open mouth.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Shape of razors major of others:
Forma de razori menor:	Shape of razors minor:
Forma de razori lat:	Shape of razors lat:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Shape of other serrate decently made: let it be done a curve to it and the sharpness of it of iron, and the member of it of knife decently made.
Forma de lu:	Shape of it:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Shape of razors in which there is a concave:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Shape of other subtle razors:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Shape of other curved-ended razors:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Shape of small razor resembling tentacle:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Shape of teeth at which the bones are incised:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Shape of other smaller incisor:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Shape of another incisor; this resembling ray, and its end is like a curve, and it is exhibited in many places on the edge of the bones:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Shape of ray which suits to the shape of that which pierces the bones:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And its end is triangular and has an acute tip.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	It is made of Indian iron, and resembling curve that all causes which we have said of razors and of incissors and of curves.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	Of incising ends and of the locking of the bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The ends may be crushed either by an innate cause or by an extrinsic cause, and if you treat that corruption with remedies which do not affect the member, then do so within this cavity that this corruption does not spread to the entire member; therefore, it is better that the patient dies rather than that a member is destroyed.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the sign of that which happens to him is that the member becomes black within, so that it is known that fire has burned it, or that you can cut off that blackness within, so that the corruption of that one is within that member who is destroyed and takes hold of the whole body; therefore, cauterize that one.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And it seems that if the cause of corruption is percussion by some poisonous causes then also with scorpion, or with a bat, or with a rattlesnake, and from similar things.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or percussion is on the end of it, then you cut off that part and do not give space for the corruption to spread so that it does not enter into the whole member.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And if you attack the member, then cut off that part from the edge of fire, and do not give space for the corruption to spread so that it does not take hold in the fire of the arm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if you attack that part instead, then cut off the arm at the joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if another corruption passes around that joint, then death for the patient occurs; and with other quantity of virtue administer.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And it seems that when corruption appears on one side of the foot instead of on the other, then you cut off that part into one of the nails.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if it takes hold in the toe of the foot, then you cut off the entire foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	May the skin peel off the foot, then cut off the sole at the joint of the foot.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if the corruption has already taken hold on the sole, then there is only one thing left to do, which is to destroy that patient; let him die.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	And the way of cutting off a member or of sawing it is that you strengthen the ligament at the joint further from which you wish to cut, and another strong ligament over the spot; and extend the ministering ligament to the places apart, and extend another ligament over them; and you separate the flesh that is between two ligaments as if it were one piece; and that part is cut off.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And let there be a strap of leather from all the joints so that it does not touch the spot; and to avoid injury to the patient, fix it with care and apply poultice.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	May the patient's condition improve when you work; then, cauterize the spot well, or put a few powders on it that restrain the blood; and return to your medicine within which is complete.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then, remove the member plagued with a strong ligament, and care for that spot so that it is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And I return to you the account of that man who was in your service in his shirt, this accident which happened to him in his shirt due to being gathered together with fire;
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	That corruption first occurred in the shirt of him that covered all his foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that man prepared himself for the purpose of preventing the corruption from spreading to the member with the speed of his breathing and the pain of his burning; and he cut off that foot at the joint, and fire healed him.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	A long time ago, that corruption occurred on the shirt of the patient who was lying down.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then he attacked me, and then I reflected on the excess of his medicine that was applied to his body because of its improvement; and the reflection did not cause any reaction, and it began to take hold in another place within the body.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And he appealed to me to cut off his body, and I did not want to cause any reaction of that excess medicine on him because it was dangerous; rather than that, I decided to kill him by cutting off his body.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And then he disappeared from me, and returned to his own land; I received him who was that man, and I cut off all his body, and it was healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And this story is not added to this text but to serve as an example of its effectiveness; and that it may be understood through it and interpreted according to its meaning.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	Of care for the symptoms and with quality of clistery with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When an apoplexy occurs in the larger members of the body and the space of the apoplexy is prolonged within that member until it comes together with blood, then it is broken and pierced, and the blood flows from it; and the place where it opened is like a vessel, and the thread where it opened is not known; if it were a vein, or a nerve, or a ligament, it is called a sinus, and it is not known as a fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	However, if the space is prolonged within that corruption approaches another member, then it is called a fistula and not known.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And the care of it is that you cut off that vessel entirely in such a way, and especially when it is softened and cut with leather, and you ensure that it does not touch the spot because of its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	And if you hope that the vessel will adhere and that that corruption has not been caused by the last consequence, and it is in the vessel that it has opened from the front, then care for it with clistery.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And you should consider the sinus, and if it is large, and the odor of that part is pleasant, then clistery with Egyptian medicine that is made of oil and vinegar and honey, and they are fixed in a vessel, and placed on fire within so that the medicine boils and penetrates to the bottom.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And you take from him the water that is necessary and dissolves it with honey; and clistery with the sinus, and strengthen the hole of it, and leave the medicine in it for two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And then extract that one of use; and make it for so many days until the wind is cleansed and the shame is refreshed again.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And some enemas are made with ash water, when it is not useful to this medicine at present; and that you take the ash of wine, and put it on water; and then put them on her, and make them run through her until you believe that the wind has stopped.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the patient does not have tolerance to Egyptian medicine or ash water, then make an enema with water and honey, and mix it with three-fold turpentine; and make an enema with wine and honey mixed, because, by the property of honey, it cleanses and washes away, and the wine attaches the wind, and especially when there is too much stinging or dryness.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you make water for some enemas and believe that the wind has stopped, then make an enema with water that softens the flesh over it.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And that you take a dye and dissolve it in olive oil or red wine, or make an enema with some of the medicines, and anoint other parts of the body which have these properties which I have already described in the treatise on ointments.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the orifices of the wind are narrow where the canula of the enema cannot be received, then you make it larger little by little, and pause in it a few wrapped up in Egyptian ointment or basil ointment until it is made larger.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And apparently if the orifices are wide, then you add a little to the quantity in which the enema is added.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the orifice from which the arm flows is raised to the armpit, then dry that pus in a hot place because when the arm is pressed in the pit of the wind, the flesh there is heated.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it is not possible to dry the wind within the limits of the bone, then you should pierce that member so that the arm flows easily according to your clothing, and so that it does not hold back the arm for any reason.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And take consolidation medicines which are placed over the wind conveniently with water, that you extend those over a sheet.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And the sheet should be of such a size that it covers all the wind; and with the right edge of the orifice of the wind, cut a little more than an inch wide, and extend another sheet of linen over it according to the quantity of the cut, and pause it there in a distant position from the orifice of the wind so that the arm is completely separated from it, and does not touch the sheet, but leave it a few days.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	And leave that which is over the orifice of the wind, which refreshes every hour so that it is removed from that by which the arm is held.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And so that you know if the water that flows from the arm is little or much, or is not digested or is undigested.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And consider the place of that wind, if the patient feels pain there or not, and if it is in the swelling.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And when your medicine has been prolonged in this way, and you see that the matter is adhering to the orifice of the wind, or has come into possession of it, then change the sheet after three days, and when you change the sheet, replace the ointment.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	And if from the wind there is a small space in which subtile viruses are present, then do not despair of the adherence to it because the healing takes place, for some men in whom the generation of flesh takes time, and in those in whom it is made in opposition to nature.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if the wind is undigested for several days, then know that the wind does not adhere; and if the adherence of the wind is delayed because of prolonged disease, then adjust your medicines, and if the medicines are moist in their substance or in their virtue, then dry them out with dye ointment.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the second medicine that is to be used after the first is that you take of dye ointment and dissolve it in olive oil, and put it over a basil leaf in its substance, and use that one; and use this one.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And it already seems like enguent, when there is no arm, dye ointment, and honey when it is thick inside, and use that one; or take myrrh and aloe, and grind them together, and sprinkle over the honey as you put it on a cloth, and line the one with honey up to the wind. And line the other with the honey that you have ground up, and spread it on a sheet.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And sometimes they are given a long, rasa of the lily of heaven (and it is the lily of heaven) and flour of erys and centaurea, and use them simple or mix them together, sprinkle them over the honey that I have described, and use it.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the wind is prolonged, and this medicine does not cure it, then know that corruption is in its pit; and inquiry has been made about bones or other hard members or joints; then you cure it with a medicine applied to the wound, as I have said before.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	Of cure of paretic and nails rubbed together and cut into finger, added to cutting them off.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Paretic is an inflammation that does not leave the nail of the foot from the hand or the leg, and strongly hurts the others, and when it is prolonged, its cure is very painful, or is a pustule on a paretic, or is corrupted, and the finger gurgles with pus, and the tip of the finger becomes black.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And when you have the water that I have described in the division and do not believe your cure, then know that you should cut off all the excess of the nail, and cauterize the wound, for cauterization is helpful in this case.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and if the additions of the nail have already reached the flesh at the base, and it has begun to break down and tear off, then know that you should pause a little thread from the angle of the nail where it rips the flesh, and push that thread up, and cut that flesh with ease, and pause over it water from the medicines that burn and corrode, until it is completely healed; and cure that one with ointment.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	And if corruption has already reached the bone, then know that you should cut out the bone and remove it, for no time is there when it is not healed that it is corrupted within it.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if corruption and corruption go together with the foot, then cut that one off, because it is not a painful memory; and cure that one within which it has been healed.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	And if the nail is hit or torn, and there is a violent pain in it, then know that you should crush the patient at first, and then cut off the nail across with a sharp knife, and be sure that the cut does not go deep into the flesh that is beneath the nail, because you will cause intense pain to the patient, and excessive swelling of the flesh; and cure that place with water.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	Mays dit adjusted, which is born in the muscles of some men, very strong it is, and also very strong in his bones, or very strong in his nails.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And some of them are born in the root of the joint, or the birth of them in some nuts of the said.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	That which is born in some nuts of the said does not hurt, but that which is born in the joints is very strong.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And of those who are born fleshy, the section is light, and it is because you cut the root of them with a sharp knife.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	That which is born in the root of the joint, the cure is difficult; and therefore keep yourself from the separation of them.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	That which is born in the said nuts, cover that you cut the beginning of the meat with a round incision into the bone, and place one of those saws close to water, and then cure that within so that it may be healed.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	The consolidation which happens in them between the seen veins or by the birth of the man who gives it there, or by consolidation with plague or by combustion of fire, or by similarity, therefore when you dry up that consolidation so that those return to their natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	Then place between them a thin leaf of lead within which is not consolidated lightly, and separate between them, or place between them a thin leaf of copper within so that it may be consolidated according to what needs.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And if consolidation happens in some of them on the palm, then dry up that consolidation according to what it is prepared and conform it to the shape of the member.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	Of the incisions of the veins, such are varicose veins.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	And such are varicose veins, and such veins are thick with excess melancholy fluid that comes in the legs of the members of the body, and more so in the legs of travelers and laborers and carriers.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Then administer a purge of black cholera from time to time with a strong emission, and make the patient bleed from the basilic vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	The cure of them is according to two ways: the one is that it be cut and that it be drawn out that black blood, and the other way is that it be lifted up and all be extracted.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The section of them is according to this way: immerse the foot at the beginning of the leg into cold water within so that the thick blood be dissolved, which is fermenting in the leg, and then tighten the leg of the patient from the top with a band, and then cut the vein in one place, or in two, or in three with a wide section, and then lift up the black blood to the hand of the patient at the bottom of the leg within, and above it in water, within so that the quantity be consumed that you want and that frequently be exhausted, and which tolerates the virtue of the medicine.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	Then take that, and order him to abstain from black cholera-causing foods.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And repeat the cure by sanguination when the veins are filled with blood and the patient feels it.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	The elevation of them is according to this way: you who race the leg of the patient, if it moves by itself, and then put it in a bath and immerse the leg into cold water within so that it swells and the veins are filled; or exercise it hard, if the bath is not to your hand, within so that the member is scratched.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	Then dry up the vein in the right place by section along the long side or at the back of it, or at the bottom of it, or cut off the top of it.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	Then open up the leg with a knife and extract the vein from all parts until it appears at the sensation, and that is the appearance of it which sometimes appears in black.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And therefore when you empty it out, and of the leg that white blood appears that should be corded.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	Then tie that to the top so that it is lifted up and drawn out of the vein, and suspend that with an ounce or more of lion's urine.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	Then dry up another section close to that section by three inches, and then extract the vein from the top of it within so that it appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	Then lift up that and cut it in the rear section within so that it is extracted from the first section, and then extract that from the second section within so that it is extracted by that section.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	Then make the blood flow so that it is extracted from the section which is higher or farther away from all the sections, within so that everything is extracted; and then cut it up.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if you do not obey me in order to extract and raise it up, then insert a double-edged needle and tie that up and extract it, or insert it from behind the leg and turn your hand around all parts so that it is drawn out.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	Keep in mind that if it is broken, it is difficult for you to raise that leg and it has come back on the patient by that wound.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then when it is completely extracted, then place over the spot of the plague that is submerged in wine and oil red and not red, and cure that within so that it may be healed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the wine has been contracted without tortuosity in which it is wrapped at the joints, and it is not according to what I have said, then when you open up that within all the joints of the leg and at the spots of wrappings, and then suspend that with a knife within so that you raise that whole.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	Keep in mind that your section should not be cut so as not to injure the vein and that wound, because it is difficult for you to raise that leg; and serve your prudence on it.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	Shape of the incision which is dried up with wine:
Forma de unci orp:	Shape of lion' urine:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not to your hand to cut like this with the knife or to be of acute extremities so that it does not injure the vein; and it is of gross flexibility, because if it were subtle, it would cut the vein because of its subtility; but keep in mind that we have said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	Of the extraction of the blood vessel.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is generated in the legs on wet ground like this, as it is in the lands of Arabs and in the lands of India with dry, scarce vegetation and where there is no grass or water.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And it is very strong that is generated in other parts of the body other than the legs.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	The generation of it is by decay which leaves the leg like this, as it comes from within the body of snakes and worms and scaly and slimy things that are generated between the leg and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	The sign of the coming of it is by this vein that occurs in the leg inflammation with fierce heat, and then the place is swollen; and then the vein comes out from the spot of that swelling as if it were the root of a plant.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And then take hold of the end of him; cover that with a piece of lead from which is the weight of one dragon, within two dragons, and leave it suspended from the chest.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	Then as many times as you see any cause outside of the joints, wrap up lead and feel that.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if it is prolonged, then you cut one of the joints and wrap it up; and do not cut that from its root so that it does not contract and enter into the flesh and cause pus and ulceration in that spot and bad healing.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	So that it may be treated smoothly and extracted little by little until it is completely removed from the back of the patient and does not cause any problems in the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And of this vein I have met in some men who are as long as their hands and half-a-hand, and already it has come to me that I should see one of 20 palms.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is inscribable in the hour of its medicine, then introduce the hook into the patient's navel and pierce that long way through the body, until all that is in the matter is evacuated, and administer putridness at the place for several days with medicines; and then cure it by the cure of abscesses.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein sometimes produces rashes and mostly when it appears at the junction of the foot or in the foot, and comes out from each orifice, and is seen to come out from each orifice.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And therefore cure it as we have said above in the division and at the water that has been said above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	Of section on worms born under the skin, and is called bovine disease.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This disease is called in some countries bovine disease because the worms are seen in the meat and also because they go throughout the body and break up the flesh, and it shows itself by a certain feeling in the limbs until it breaks up the flesh and comes out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And its generation is by putrefaction of certain humors, so that when this happens worms and snakes and earthworms and roundworms are born in the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is feared because of its malignity that when it goes through the body and rises to the head, and has come to the neck, then a strong fever attacks it and destroys the neck, and there are seen worms in it.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And so when you want to treat it and extract it, then do not do it unless you feel its movement and appearance at your hands, and then cover it with your hand smoothly and firmly, and dry it on top of it, and extract it.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is pressed into the flesh and you do not feel it, then pause cauterization on the place where it is located, and the main cause that is feared is the corruption of that place as we have said above.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	If you should find that it has come to the neck next to the throat, then grip it tightly on top of the neck with a firm grip, and dry it out, and extract it; and if the patient uses a method of drinking medicines that evacuate bad humors, and does not consume foods that cause putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	Of section on the disease of fire.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This disease is called in our country nafir, and it is a painful disease that appears in some limbs, and then changes from one limb to another.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And I have already seen that second thing that I recommend to you.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	You were called to a female patient in a village, and you saw her arms and discovered a small swelling in the vein of the arm, and after it had been for an hour, I saw that swelling move towards it like water flowing from one place to another, and more easily than silver flows when it is liquid.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then it went away to the pain in that place and stayed there in the muscle, and then came back after an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And then it returns to the other side until it reaches the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And then I told you that it should be mixed all over the body, as I saw it; and I was very surprised at its change and at the speed with which it went from one limb to another.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I have already seen that second thing in my own body the way you showed me, however, I have not seen many of those that change limbs with pain.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	I did not see it in the arms like that when it was on the woman.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And you did not think it was here because the woman is of small stature, for she has short arms and veins that are open to the air, and such an appearance appeared to her when she moved.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	It is necessary that it does not appear according to this reversal of blessing in those who are healthy and have thin veins.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And if you want to cure it and the patient feels pain, then do not appear to him in the shape of a doctor as we have said above, then grip it and hold it gently and dry it out on top of it, and stop the flowing motion with cauterization at the place.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	But if you do not see it in the arms, then you will treat it with the extraction of the body and with water that you throw out from it, and take pills made from the ashes of serapin and similar things.
De extraccio de sagetas.	Of the extraction of arrows.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrows are different according to their points, and also according to the places of the body where they strike, for their diversity is this: some have large tips, others are small, some are concave, others are convex, some have tongues, and those to which languages belong; and those that are star-shaped.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And that which is according to the limbs and places of the body where they strike is according to two ways: because the principal limbs are concaved, such as the neck, heart, chest, lung, nose, belly, bladder, and their similars; and when it strikes another limb, then you avoid extracting that arrow from it, for I recommend that you do not extract it, then it is that you prevent the extraction of that arrow from those limbs in which death strikes them, and when you do not appear to those bad limbs, and the arrow does not enter into the depth of the limb, then extract it and treat the plague.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And of the limbs of the head is when the arrow strikes it and enters through the bone, and is seen coming out of the nape, because this happens with violent sudor, and scotoma, and vertigo, and stiffness in the arms, and inflammation and stiffness of the tongue, and spasms, and confusion of thought, and colic, and the word is suddenly lost, and is seen from the place of the plague a white fluid-like substance, resembling blood, and has a similar appearance to the moistness of the flesh.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And so if you appear to those limbs, then you abstain from treating or extracting the arrow unless it is outside.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	But if the arrow strikes in the heart, so that it is near to the left arm, and feels like something stuck in a hard cause, and does not feel like a wound; and a strong movement of the arrow is like a pulse movement, and the plague comes out black, and stiffens the limbs, and makes a hissing sound, and then you know that death has set in completely.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And when the arrow has struck in the lung, it seems like a froth of plague coming out from it, and the vessels that are next to it appear to be swollen, and the color of the patient changes, and he exhales great breath, and desires air to breathe.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the arrow strikes in the veil that is on the foot, and pain appears to be close to small ribs, then it causes great pain and a deep sigh, and all the limbs of the body become limp.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if the arrow strikes in the stomach, then there is great pain of indigestion.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if the arrow strikes in the belly and is stuck there, then there is a breach of the plague, or the cloth, or the bag, which is torn, and there is no hope for the cure of it by extracting the arrow.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	If the arrow hits the bladder and urine is discharged from it, and if there is some cause for discharge from it to the outside, and if the pain over the patient's back becomes strong, then you know that it is deadly.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	The other members as well when the head, neck, throat, shoulders and sides are affected, and the spine and its auxiliaries, and the pelvis, and the sacrum and coccyx, and their similar parts are affected, are saved according to the main dispositions when the arrow does not hit a vein or an artery, and is not a poisonous one.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I recommend that you see from the nature of these arrows, so that you know how to act about the cure of the patient.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	That cause is, because in a man an arrow hits the lacrimal duct of his eye at the root of the nose, and I extracted it from him from the other part, I cut off his ear, and he was cured, and nothing happened to his eye.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And I extracted another arrow from a Jew which hit him in the eye lid, I cut off his eyelid, and the arrow was hidden already, and there was not much of it left except a small end which was attached to his eyelash, and it was a sharp arrow of the Turks, with an iron point; there were no ears.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	Then the Jew was cured, and nothing bad happened to his eye.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And I extracted another arrow from a Christian which had hit him in the throat, and it was an Arabic arrow, and there were no ears on it; then I inserted between two guideposts, and already it had been submerged in his throat, and then I extracted it slightly, and he was cured of Christianity.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And I extracted another arrow from a man which had hit him in his belly, and I thought he would die of it; so then, as the time passed thirty days and there was not any change in his condition, I inserted into the arrow and pulled it out, and he was cured, and nothing bad happened to him.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And I saw another man in whom an arrow had hit him in his back, and the plague was established on him, and then, as soon as he had been a few days ill, the arrow lodged in his crotch.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And I saw a woman in whom an arrow had hit her in her belly, and the plague was established inside her, and it did not change its disposition in respect of some of her natural qualities; but the woman was not harmed in any way with regard to some of her external qualities.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And I saw another man in whom an arrow had hit him in the face, and the plague was established on him, and it broke the arrow; he did not suffer any pain, but he seemed like these.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And I extracted the arrow from the prince of the king which had hit him in his nose; it had already slipped to one side a little, and all the arrow was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	Then I was called for the cure of the patient within three days from when the arrow had lodged in it.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then I reversed the plague of the arrow which had slipped to one side; and then I inquired about it with subtle questionings, and did not feel it; but I felt a pulsation on his right ear, and then I waited for that pulsation to be caused by the end of the arrow.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And I applied an ointment to the place with a plaster which is effective for contracting and digesting, making known to myself that the place will dry up for me so that the arrow's end appears to me; so that it can be extracted.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And nothing bad happened to the place where the arrow had hit it; but I continued with the plaster on it for several days and there was no change; but in the meantime the plague was established, and it broke out of the nose by space of five days from then, when he felt the arrow inside his nose, and he brought it to me.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	Then I applied to the plague an acute corrosive medicine for several days from then, until it burst; and I inquired about it with subtle questioning, and I felt the end of the arrow which was attached to its shaft.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	Then I applied to the plague with that acute medicine for those days until I clearly saw the end of the arrow, and then it came to me time after time within four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	Then the plague became more violent, and I had to use a pair of scissors in order to open it up, because that was how the shape of those was described at the end of this chapter, until then I did not extract it; but I restored that plague.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And certain doctors said that the cartilage of the nose was not restored, and I restored it, and the plague was established on it, and he was cured by a whole healing; and it did not leave him for any cause in his body.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I recommend to you the quality of extracting some arrows from him, so that you know how to extract them with care and meaning, because the parts of this art and the definitions of those are not understood by me, as they are described in this book.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the skilled workman knows a little about it by experience; and in this case, which is absent from you, he knows how to operate in a new way, and to use new instruments for removing the foreign causes of the art when they occur.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	So then I say that arrows do not shoot out of the members from where they are stuck, but only according to two ways: either by attracting the location in which they enter, or by the opposite of the other part.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is shot from a place towards another one, or proceeds from a meatly place, and is shot out of it; that is called an arrow.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if you do not obey the instructions of the hour when it is shot, then know that you will have to wait a few days before finding the meat which is in its environment, and from which the attraction of it and its exit can be discovered.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	And seemingly if it is stuck in the flesh and you do not obey me with care, then let it lie for a few days and every day repeat that with care and moisture; and there are no arrows of it left.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if you do not obey me with care for a few days, then know that you have to pierce the course of the arrow in that bone from beginning to end with subtle questionings until the place is made known to you which was caused by the arrow; and then extract it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the arrow is stuck in the bone of the head and has already penetrated one of the nerves of the brain, and appears on the outside of the body for several days; because, if the arrow pierces the skull, then death will be prolonged for it.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrow is not stuck anywhere except in the middle of the bone and does not pass into the skull; and then you have to wait for several days, and nothing bad happens to it because of those accidents; then you have to extract the arrow with care, and you will have to attract it with care.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	But if it is stuck and you do not obey me with extraction, then administer taravels in the course of the arrow as I have repeated; and then cure the place until it is healed.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	But if the arrow has already been lodged in the middle of the body and is of a bad feeling, then you should ask about it with subtle questioning; and if you feel it, then shoot it with some instruments which are suitable for attracting it.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot operate over him for the constriction of the plica and for the length of the preon, then you should operate on the plica before it is widened and before the arrow can be extracted.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if he has his ears attached to the skin, then you should free the flesh in which they are embedded from all sides as much as possible; and devise how to operate on them, unless you can operate on the eversion of the flesh in the fracture of the ears or in the torsion of those within that it becomes necessary.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you extract the arrow from any place where it is, then use your hand with forceps on all sides until it becomes loose; and be subtle at the last subtlety that the arrow does not break and that it is done to your difficult extraction of him and of that extraction.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot operate on him in your turn, then leave it for a few days until the parts that are in his path have healed; and repeat the operation when they are healed.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	Maybe if you have trouble with blood flowing, then administer to him that which we have said about cure in his book.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And keep your virtue of incising veins or nerves, or a cord, and administer remedies to him as much as possible in the eversion of the arrow; and make water with ease and tranquility and delay and firmness thus and then to you and to his recommendation.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And thus you should guide the arrow so that the patient is according to the figure according to which the position of the arrow in him should be, because it is more useful.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	Maybe if this is not possible for you, then administer to him what is possible for you according to the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	Maybe the arrows that are outside-directed by the contrary of the other part, or that you have already operated on some parts of the outside, or if the tip of the arrow is felt by the sensation of the part below the cord corresponding to it; then cut off that part; and do so according to the quantity in which the forceps hold; and throw that away, because it is done lightly at a little.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	Maybe if it is held in the bone, then cut it with forceps according to the contrary within which the arrow presses on the bone, and make it bigger itself, and extract that.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	And otherwise, leave that for a few days, and repeat that within that it burns.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the head of the arrow is in him, then push it into his body.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	Maybe if the head is fallen and you want to administer an impulse, then insert it, if it is deaf, into the concavity of him in the nose of the arrow, and push it into his body.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	Maybe if the arrow is concave, then push that with a strong instrument entering into it, because the arrow is loosened by that.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the arrow is poisoned, then cover all the flesh in which it is with water, if this is possible for you, and cure that with water that suits you.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the arrow has struck in the foot, or in the belly, or in the bladder, or in the rib, and it is close to you so that you touch that with your hand, then cut off that part, and keep yourself from cutting the veins or nerves, and extract that, and if you feel pain, then treat that within that it is healed.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Shape of forceps that are thrown with the arrows:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	If the extremities of his arm or leg are frayed with awl, then cut them off with shears when you take hold of the arrow so that they do not get in the way.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And of these are made with special threads, large, small and medium, according to the quantity of the size of the arrow and the width of the plica, and the constriction of him.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	Shape of a concave point of this end that is made with an awl so that it is loosened the tip of the arrow in him, and a push of that deaf:
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Shape of a deaf end push:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	with a ray so that it is loosened the tip of him in the concave arrow and is pushed with that.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	of venepuncture from the veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so .xxx., de las quals so en le cap .xvi., so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins of venepuncture from which blood is usually drawn are .xxx., of which the head is at .xvi., so are two pulsating veins that run along the ears, which are called auricular veins; two herbs that grow in the two temple areas; and two veins that flow into two tears from two holes that are called lacrimal veins; and the prepared vein at the middle of the forehead, and the vein that is at the end of the nose; and two guide veins that run along the cheek; and two veins that run along the upper lip; and two veins that run along the lower lip; and - these are the veins that are called algidal -; and two veins that flow from the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so .v.; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	Maybe the veins that are venepunctured in the arms are 5; Because one of those is a cephalic vein, and it should be the main wild one; and the people call it "the vein of the head", and it is a vein that runs through the forehead, and another ram of the cephalic vein, and another ram of the temporal vein; and its name is that which is paused on the forehead in the domestic latz, and it is called "citillar", and they call that one "the vein of the belly"; and the veins from the arms, and it is paused over the fire, and that is the vein which is operated on, and that is the one that appears above the pout by clear manifestation; and the save-vein, and it is the vein that runs between the two auricular veins and the smallest pus.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And in the head and chest are three veins; the one of those is what is from the left side of the forehead; and the second one is a phrenic vein, and the place of it is from the right side of the forehead; and the sciatic vein, and the place of it is from the left side of the forehead; and in the chest are other veins that resemble those.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The improvement of the veins that are brought to the ears is due to small and emigrant and sahafate and ulcerous headaches of the old head.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of those to be bled is according to which you have turned his head: it is that it is shaved at the top of the patient, and that he is frayed at the top of the patient in the occiput in the place of both veins together with a wide cloth on all sides; and bind him tightly to the side of the head with a bandage within that it appears the two veins and their places next to the ears in two dimple-like places on the top of the head; and you want those with the small words, and if you feel the pulse of those with the small words, then there is no attempt.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Here is the translation of the first sentence:
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And raise your hand to the vein and to the cavity on its sides, and cut the vein with a deep incision.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And be the length of the incision equal to or more than two fingers' width from the edge, and make a cut as long as you want; and add as much as necessary.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then hold it firmly in the pulse and let that be healed.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And what has been said at the beginning of this book about the incision and about cauterization is also true here.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	Of the two veins, the arterial one is the older and more bad; it causes frequent headaches, and sharp pain in the eyes and in the sides.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of bleeding these veins is according to what I tell you: if there is pain in the patient's hand, it is a good sign, and their pulse is strong; but if the pain is in the thigh, it is not so good a sign, and their pulse is weak. Then you may try.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	Then raise the vein above the cavity with a gentle pull until you feel it; and insert the incision there, and then raise the vein up; and make the same cut in the other two veins; and add as much blood as your need requires.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then remove the tourniquet from the patient's thigh and let it fall; and place your hand on the vein for an hour, and then put pressure on that point and hold it firmly, and let that be healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And what has been said before about them, about the incision, and about the drawing of blood at the beginning of this book is also true here.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And the healing of bleeding from the vein in the forehead is due to bloodletting from the cerebral vein because of old headaches, and also to ancient emesis, rigor, and foul-smelling ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of bloodletting from him is according to what I tell you: if the patient's thigh hurts, it is not good; but if there is no pain, then take the instrument which is called a hook; and this is its form.
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then make the point eminently on the hook near the vein and strike it with a soft or sharp blow in your hand, and allow blood to flow as much as you want; then remove the tourniquet from the patient' thigh and let that be healed.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	And some say that bloodletting is done in the middle of the body, but it is not so severe as when it is done at the ends; for the bones are close together and strong, and would be split by bloodletting if it were done at the ends.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	Of the two veins which are behind the eyes, one passes through the eye and the other through the palate for the sake of the eye, and causes headaches and old emesis in the face.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	And the quality of bloodletting is that the patient' thigh hurts when the tourniquet is tight; and make the bloodletting from the thigh, and you stand on top of it.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And make the bloodletting according to the transverse line at a short length, because it is not flesh there; and if the bloodletting is soft, then the end is strong, and would be split if it were done with a sharp instrument.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Then let blood flow as much as you need; and place your hand on those points, and hold them firmly with a grip; then remove the blood from those points.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	Of the bloodletting from the nose, it is related to sudden fever and to sharp pain in the face, and also to old emesis in the face, and more so when it is done at the beginning of this process.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of bloodletting from him is that the patient' thigh hurts when the tourniquet is tight; and take his left hand, and make the bloodletting softly long, and place it in the middle of the nose according to the direction; for the vein does not appear here, and because the pulse begins to flow soon.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	Then finish the bloodletting with your hand gently, and let blood flow according to your need; and then put it in your hand for a while, because that is restored little by little.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	Of the bloodletting of the two veins by constricting the pulse, it is related to the beginning of leprosy, and to sudden headaches and violent emesis and foul-smelling ulcers which corrode.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And the quality of bloodletting from those veins is that the patient' thigh hurts when the tourniquet is tight, and hold it firmly; and place the hand on the top of the thigh, and make the bloodletting from the thigh, and stand on a stool.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	Then make the bloodletting from the vein long with wide bloodletting little by little; and then take as much blood as necessary, and do the same for the other vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	Then remove the tourniquet and hold the two veins firmly with a grip that does not hurt; and let those be healed because the plague is cured.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	Of the bloodletting of the veins which are causing pain in the mouth and in the gums, it is related to small blisters and pustules, and to corruption of the gums, and to bad ulcers and fissures, and to bad ulcers in the nose and in its openings.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	And the quality of bloodletting from those veins is that you cut the patient' nose before you, and hold his hand firmly with a tourniquet; and then lift up the lips of his mouth and look at two veins which are on the right side of the lip, and the other on the left; and demonstrate which one is darker than the other, and this is because those veins are small black ones; and then cut one of them with an innocent incision.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	Then if you are in doubt, leave that one alone, and do not know which of them it is; then go to cut the most prominent one, and the most manifest pustule on those veins.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And make a incision like those two veins are in the lips above them.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	Then cut again between the two veins which are on the patient' lips.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	Of the two veins which are behind the tongue, it is appropriate to bloodletting from the cerebral vein because of old headaches, and also to emesis in the mouth, and to old emesis in the throat.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And the quality of bleeding these veins is that you follow the tongue between your two hands in front of the sun, and raise the patient' tongue, and look at both sides of it, one side dark and the other light; and note which one is darker than the other.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	Then bloodlet from each one; and remember not to use your hand in bloodletting these veins, because those are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the veins which are bloodletting in the arm are those from which blood is taken in all men, and the bloodletting from them is done according to two ways: either by making a incision with a sharp instrument, or by pressing; or by cutting with a scalpel, and adding if it needs, and this is its form.
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this incision is the one which is appropriate for small veins and subtle ones according to the width of the veins and according to their constriction.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Shape of the bloodletting incision:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	is the shape of the incision which is done several times, and it opens concave veins which are full of blood, and those that contain large amounts of blood.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	And this is the way to perform an olive oil enema:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And this kind of enema is smaller and has a milder temperature and effect on the very fine blood vessels that contain mild acid sap.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	May the improvement of the bazilian vein enema which is one of three veins: it extrudes the blood from the patient's head and neck, and from there that it reaches the feet and abdomen.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And let the fluidos be expelled by that vein enema which is one of three veins: it extrudes the blood from the patient's head and neck, and from there that it reaches the feet and abdomen. And if this enema should be used, that the person who performs the enema take care to avoid hitting that artery, and if he makes a mistake and stings in the injection site of the enema, it will cause blood flow, so it must be prevented that this enema is done with a puncturing enema, after which it will be cut with an axilet, but not before.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the bazilian vein does not appear by itself, then let it be that you give up that vein and that you switch to another one, or look for a small vein; or perform the enema at the end of the arm, because that vein is obvious, and dry it with an axilet after the enema has been performed.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	May the enema be performed from the back of the arm, from the place where you can feel the pulse until the elbow, and then rub it with a cotton ball; and then hold the arm and cut the vein with an axilet as mentioned above; and remember that the piercing must not be made in a certain space of the vein.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	And when you stretch it with your hand, if there is a strong pulse, then this inflation is an inflation of the artery and therefore it will burst.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if the blood flows in an enema like a child's breath, then you know that it is the blood of the artery; and then place your hand on the area for a long time; and then remove your hand, and if the blood stops flowing, because the eyes are blurred when they stop flowing, then hold your arm tightly and let it go.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And watch for any swelling on the patient's leg, and be cautious with it, and do not cause any injury to it for a few days until it heals.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	May the blood not stop flowing, and if you have to go somewhere without medicine with water, then cut the artery, if it is apparent; because its tip is contracted, and the blood stops flowing; or that you take a piece of fistula, and open it up, and pinch one end and tighten it over the vein's stricture until the next day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And then if the blood has stopped flowing, it is good; and if not, then treat that leg with water from which the memory of the place where the swelling has occurred has been removed by the flow of blood.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And the stopping of the blood from that leg is difficult in small conditions due to the small space of the elbow, and because of the possibility of injuring the arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	May the bazilian vein enema be useful to extract the blood from the cerebral part of the head and the neck part of the body; because it is composed of veins from those two parts, as mentioned above.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And if the person who performs the enema is cautious about performing the bazilian vein enema, because that vein is a nerve; and then, if he makes a mistake in injecting the enema and injures the nerve, it will cause stupor, and its recovery is difficult; and this nerve appears when feeling is lost; and if this nerve is hidden from many people and is subtle and not obvious, then let the person who performs the enema pause the enema at the point where he injures the nerve, and avoid hitting that nerve with his own hand.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if the vein is between two nerves, then you open it in length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The improvement of the cephalic vein enema is that it attracts the blood from the head and relieves the patient'
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And in this case, if you want to perform the enema with an olive oil enema or a mint enema; because it is the safest of all veins, because it does not contain nerves or arteries.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	However, the enema should be performed in such a way that you do not prick the head of the patient with too much force, and look for a more convenient place, and avoid pricking it with the first strike; because it will cause pain to the patient if this happens.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	But a severe fever may occur in some people if it is pricked with the first strike; and such an apoplexy will not be noticed on the patient' side.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	May the quality of that enema and its complications determine whether it should be corrected.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first of them is that one from which it can be known that an enema should not be administered except for the sake of health and in anticipation of its occurrence; that it should be performed on one of the veins that are part of the body: cephalic, facial, or bazilian; and that it should be done at the beginning of spring, during the day, and closer to winter when digestion appears.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And an enema should be performed on the third day or at the earliest on the second day after the start of a day that passes three hours later.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	May the enema be administered when it is convenient and necessary; or at noon or at night, or during any other time.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And if the person who has to be enema is not over sixty years old and a woman is not over fifty years old; and the elderly should not be enema'd unless they are ill.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And if someone wants to be enema'd by any method, then he should moisten his body before the enema with an axilet; because the veins do not suck blood from the areas that are wet, which are useless, and do not cause pain to the main parts of the body.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And do not enema patients who are sick with jaundice and drunkenness, or who have diarrhea or vomiting; because the enema will cause a change in them, and will dissolve their strength, or their body, or their animals; and this is not an enema that should be performed during pregnancy or childbirth, or for any other reason that causes pain.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And then consider the subtle humors before that if the blood is thick, or because of food and drinks, or because of medicines; because that will cause the blood to become thicker; and this should be prevented by not eating or drinking certain things near the time of enema.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And then enter into water if there is no reason to prohibit it, or exercise that causes the blood to be subtle; because the blood will become thinner and stronger by such exercises.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And pause the enema of that leg at the foot of the day; because it is close to three o'clock in the afternoon, as mentioned above.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And remember that the foot of the day is a good time to perform enemas for all kinds of animal accidents, such as anger, fear, or unnecessary work and trouble; because it is an appropriate time to perform enemas for all these things.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And then, in the same day and time, perform enemas with respect to these causes according to their quantity of possibility: for the smell and odour of balsams and substances similar to them.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And follow the enema administrator with a pointed cautery that is easier for him; or with the one used on that leg.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And he should then remove his arms, and rub the area with a fluitron for two or three times; and then tighten the ligature with a belt and wrap it with two times.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And the constriction should be early, since the constriction when it is not tight, or the constriction is too loose, then prohibit the flow of the wound; or if it is too soft, and then prohibit the binding of the wound with a bandage.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And the constriction should be applied, so that whoever is supposed to be fluitoned should rub their hands together between their legs until the veins swell and become noticeable.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And the fluitomator should rub his fluitomator with a little olive oil specifically; and then place his left hand index on that vein, leaving the spot where he wants to do the fluitomation so that the vein will escape a little, and the percussion will stop because from those veins is that it is full of ventilators and when you pause the fluitomation above that it contracts, then the fluitomator should be discovered; and the fluitomation does not constrict the vein, and if it constricts, that vein is tight.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And therefore, because the fluitomator should be stopped and be solicited in all these causes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And then pause the fluitomation, more so if the vein is found in a crease, then do not; and if not, then repeat the process in another crease nearby, or above it at a fast pace, if the spot is not apparent.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the spot is apparent or the patient's leg is swollen, then leave it alone for a day or two, and do not tighten the ligature, because it will cause pain; nor let it enter a bath.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And then repeat the fluitomation if the area is swollen.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the sight is small and the pain is slight, and you fear that the amount you want will not come out, then repeat the fluitomation in that spot again correctly and adjust a little at the site, and do not let it enter a bath beforehand because the spot is apparent in most people; indeed, the spot is apparent in most people.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	But if that has already become apparent, then do not repeat it, because it will not excuse you from any cause; and pause over that part of the foot where the oil is, for it eases the pain of the foot.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And this location is better than other locations to rub with oil.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	And it seems that administering oil during the whole fluitomation with which veins you should prohibit the binding of the foot, and you make a water-like mixture of tar and sage when you pause from one of those spots on the spot, because the pain has lessened and has spread out when it is thick.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if a large lump has been generated in the spot of the fluitomation, since crease-like spots occur, and more so at that which does not bleed but that crease, or in the site of a small vein, then you should lie down and pause on the spot with a sponge infused with water and salt, slightly cut, and tighten it for an hour, because it dissolves.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And when water is made from the foot of the foot of that vein in the form of a bandage or another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if it remains in the spot for several days any blackness or greenness, do not use water; and if you want to, pause over that part of the foot with a mixture of almond oil and myrrh dissolved, or a mixture of mint juice and calamus, or something similar.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	And crease-like spots occur, and the constriction should be administered with fluitomation from the base.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And therefore pause your hand on that spot, and if you feel a soft feeling on that spot, then the eminence is bad and evil; and then remember that you should not pause over that part of the foot with any water that we have said, because it will flow strongly from the artery of the foot.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And make a plaster with that water in which it is tightened, so that the spot is hardened, and then heal that part with another treatment until it is healed.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And when you remove the foot from the patient completely, according to the amount of its virtue and according to the winning color over the foot according to what appears.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	Because if the foot is black, then you should leave it alone until it heals; and if you make it thick, then you should leave it alone until it becomes thinner; and if it is hot, then let its sharpness go away.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And when that which is swollen and strong and needs to be removed from the foot in a crease, then the fluitomation of the vein should be widened and the fluitomation should be made.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And when that which is swollen is soft, then do the opposite of what you have done; and when you remove it in three creases, and make the three creases tight.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	And the best thing to be administered is the vein fluitomation, which is a transverse section, not a puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	And this method of fluitomation saves the foot from pain and nerve injury, and it is more praiseworthy and more saving than fluitomation according to its depth and length.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And to which is accustomed to happen faints, then do the fluitomation before it, with a little of water infused in milk or simple syrup cut; and remove from the foot in three creases or four.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if it is a cold and wet day, then rub before the fluitomation with an infused water of myrrh or of honey flavored with spices such as cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, or something similar, or of infused oil and aromatic herbs, or of infused water and fragrant spices.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if fainting occurs due to the fluitomation, and it is a cause of the foot to be cold, then rub with infused water of spices such as cinnamon and cloves; and use mint for the patient's feet.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use other causes that we have said in the division in the chapter on fainting due to evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And whoever wants to ease their arms and dissolve their foot according to the second crease, then rub with water for a mobile foot; and its virtue is that it eases, and you should remove the foot little by little, so is according to the amount of its virtue in consecutive days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	But whoever wants to ease their arms and remove their foot according to the third crease, then make water for seven or nine hours after the first fluitomation.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	And whoever wants to remove the foot from their body in the opposite direction of the spot, then rub on the second or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	And that foot in which it is already hot and has become sharp and causes fever, then rub it on the first crease, and make a large amount of fluitomation, and make a bandage with it; and pause your hand on the patient' arm over their pulse, so that it does not die because of syncope, because when the spots are like creases, all the conditions for fluitomation are preserved; and you should not put your hand on the patient's wrist near their pulse, because they will die instead of fainting, since carelessness causes it.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And when you want to ease your arms and remove the foot according to the second crease, and it is already blocked the opening of the vein, and it will be difficult to remove the foot from the foot; then push down on that part with force and bend it gently, because water is too bad.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Here is the translation of the text:
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	If the vein is broken, then leave it alone and do not touch it until the bleeding has stopped.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if necessity compels you to evacuate the blood secondly, and it is no excuse, then leave him alone in that place or in another limb in some other vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the vein called "funis of the arm" is flubotome when it is uncovered or unhidden, for it is made up of those.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	And the quality of the flubotomy is that the patient's hand enters into cold water before the vein bursts and the vein appears clearly.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	Then tighten it gently with a ligature halfway; and then flubotome across the small, not laterally or along its length.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And be wide open and your flubotomy should you make on the joint of the hand a little bit.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if you prevent the flow of blood, then you should put the hand in cold water and leave the blood to run into the water until you satisfy your need.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	Maybe if you are in the summer days, then you are excused from putting the hand in cold water, and the body is paused in cold water in wintertime.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And the flubotomy of this vein is more safe than any other veins, because there are no pulsating veins or nerves there.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And the flubotomy of the right arm's forearm is connected to the neck.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of the flubotomy is that you tighten the hand or your own hand, because you put it in cold water, before the vein bursts and becomes very visible; then cut across the small vein, not laterally or along its length. And if you cut this from the top down, it will not be seen.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And keep your hand away from flubotome, because there are nerves under the skin to be cut off.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	Then return the hand to cold water and let the blood run into it, because if you do not put that hand in cold water, the blood will coagulate in the vein's orifice and prevent its flow.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And when you extract the blood according to the quantity of need, then place a salt and oil over the vein so that it does not solidify too much; and apparently, cover that you do not cut through all branches straight.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	Maybe the improvement of flubotomizing the left arm' is that it is connected to the neck.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And do the same for the right arm.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And the benefit of flubotoming the sephena vein is to the causes of diseases that are in the beginning parts of the body, so as to the causes of mother' diseases, and to the retención of menstruation, and to the causes of rashes and sores of legs and thighs, and to their similarity to the causes of diseases.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	And the quality of flubotoming is that the patient puts his hand in cold water and makes a friction on it until the veins appear; then place a knot on the joint of the hand; and the location of the vein cut appears clearly, and from there it branches into the face of the hand many times.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And then flubotome the upper arm widely or from there cut the skin clearly, because it is better and safer; for it is more convenient to cut the skin here rather than on the hand.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you flubotome on the face of the hand, then keep away from nerves that are there over the face of the hand, and your flubotomy should be made across the small, not laterally or along its length.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And it is a safe flubotomy.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	Maybe if you prevent the flow of blood; then you should put the hand in cold water and let the blood run into it before it is evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the flubotome is wrong in the first cut, then repeat the flubotomy a little bit more, for the location is safe; and you do not fear it here rather than keeping away from nerves.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And do the same thing with the other arm by wrapping it up.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	The location of the sciatic vein is here rather than keeping away from the root of the leg; for the location is where the bone begins to branch out.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And the benefit of flubotomizing the sciatic vein is that it is for the cause of pain in the hip when it is due to gout.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the quality of flubotoming is that the patient goes into a bath, and quickly tightens his hand from the base of the thumb to the tip with four fingers in a long, thin band; for it does not appear until it is done so.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And when it appears then flubotome that limb according to the cross, which is at your hand and according to the length; for the location of that limb is safe.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And it is in the form of men when it is heated; and if you feel that limb, and it does not cause a sensation to appear to you, then flubotome any part of it, and it is that which appears on the face of the hand before the ear' bone and the ring finger.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And keep away from nerves, and let the blood run in the quantity you want.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	Then take off the ligature and place it over the location of the flubotomy carefully; for it will heal gently.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Of windiness and of the qualities of using those.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Of windiness is for corns, or for earache, or for dizziness.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	The windiness is done in two ways: one is to cut and extract blood, and the other is to induce windiness by cutting.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this windiness that is induced by cutting is done in two ways, for it is either with fire or without fire.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And the locations of windiness that are administered by cutting and extracting blood are twelve parts of the body, of which one is under the nose, and it is the last part of the head; and the back of the neck from the two sides of the jaw, and the mouth from below the jaw, and two spatulas, and the alohosters, and it is on the end of the chin; and two fire, and they are of the two arms; and two chisels, and two knives.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	And windiness does not extract blood except from small veins in the flesh, and it does not cause virtue by those, as if it were done by flubotomy; nor does it cause windiness to be made with fire or without fire in any disease caused by repetition within the body until it is completely emptied.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	Maybe if necessity compels you to induce windiness for any reason or continuously, then leave it alone at the beginning of the meal and at its end; and in the middle of the meal; and in the middle of the night.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The cause is that of the people who have blood multiplied within them before they drink water and become sick from the extraction of it by windiness and suffer a great burden and sadness in their heads and necks, and darkness and bewilderment in their eyes; and those whose speech is multipled; and those who spit out blood; and those who sleep much, and those who wake up much and experience dry heat and cold and other similar causes.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And thus when times because of some such cause, and particularly if it is in the third or middle part of the month, then I command that a wind be made before it has passed two or three hours.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And the relief of wind from the nape is that when it puts pressure on the head and makes one wet, it is appropriate that there be an evacuation from all the body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this wind is in place of cerebrospinal tap.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	It is not appropriate that one who uses a rub-down composition or in which there is catarrh should give wind, for it causes great harm.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And by this water it is not appropriate that one use those old things, and in the heads of which there are injuries from scratching.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	And by this water it is not appropriate that one continue over it; and by this water you command the wind-maker to pause your hand for a moment in the area of the genitals, fearing the generation of oblivion.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	And the relief of alcohol is in place of cerebrospinal tap and of the basal artery; and by this it puts pressure on the larynx, and on the contraction of air and on the splitting of the vocal cords, and on coughing, and on retching.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And if the wind-making of alcohol is stopped for a little while, for if it is paused from behind, it generates weakness in the body and in the stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And the relief of alkaidahan puts pressure on the accidental pains in the head and on opthalmia, emigration, prefaciousness, and the pains in the roots of the teeth; and it is in place of the basal tap.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And if you command the wind-maker not to press your hand for the sake of cutting so that it does not cut the artery and cause a flow of blood.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And if wind is blown behind the jaw, it gives alcohol in the mouth and causes corruption of the gums and a resemblance to the maladies that are in the mouth; and it is in place of cutting the other way, which is between the two lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	And the wind that is made on the two spatulas puts pressure on Caphistan, who is made by the replete quality of heat.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And the wind that is made in the two openings inside the mouth gives relief from the cerebral tap of three veins, for that one is from the basal artery, the fuscular and the cephalic; for those three veins are smaller than the others veins within which can arrive the attraction to the three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And command the wind-maker not to process in cutting, for the place is naked of flesh, and leave it without nerves and arteries.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And it is a wind that is blown on the ass and gives relief from hemorrhoids of the anus and from ulcers that are open.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And if you command the wind-maker to make a great wind, for the place is worthy of firm division; and a strong wind that does not cut should be made in cutting.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	And the winds of the legs are made by a manifest minimization, for they attract the blood from all the body, and give relief from ancient pains of the chest and of the mother, and of the bladder; and they cause menstruation, and give relief to both urinary and faecal matters; and it is in place of cutting two veins, and alhorcoben, and two chilblains.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	However, it does not beautify all the body and causes fainting in men.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And of the winds of alhorcoben, the relief is similar to the relief of two legs' wind.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	And the quality of position of the winds is that you pause the wind at the beginning and let it go by early time, and do not prolong the position of the winds; rather, pause them slightly, and keep them in a controlled manner, and may the humors come to their place by adventitiousness.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And it does not cease repeatedly, and continue inside until it sees the place turn red and inflate and see the appearance of the heat of the blood.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And then you cut off and repeat the flow slightly by slightly, and approach in disposition of the bodies.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	For that man who is of tender flesh of the heart, it is appropriate that you cut him once and not more, so that the place is not ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And command the wind-maker to amplify the cutting and make it slightly longer, and make the flow easily.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if the blood is thick, then cut two times, for in the first time it makes the way of subtleization to the blood and to the liquidity of it.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	And may there be in the second to the acquired scrutiny of the extraction of the gross blood.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the blood is foul, then let there be made a cutting on the third time for it to achieve the latter.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	And at last, when we want to extract the blood little by little or a little, it is enough with one cutting.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we want to extract from one blood, cut by the weight of cutting; and if we know that the blood is thick, then cut by a heavy cutting.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the term of "cutting" in which is the depth of the knife so only.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if the one of whom the knife is thick, hard, rough, and the pores are tight, then make the places of the winds smooth slowly, wide resolutely; and if it is in summer, then there is oil of aloe or oil of violet, or oil of strawberry flowers, or oil of chamomile of the flower-bed; and if it is in winter, then make oil of snow, or oil of lily, or oil of chamomile, or oil of garlic, and to those resemblances.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the superfluity is thick, scrape, then make the oil be violet, or oil of balsam, or oil of aloe, or oil of anise, and to those resemblances.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	And if the wind-maker is of tender flesh, then make it not be with oil; and if these places of the winds of their appropriates, then make the wind be washed by a strong water, or by fresh water from the well, or by salt water, and resemblances to those.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And if the blood is of a moist thickness, then wash your winds with wine or water of mirth and pomegranate, and resemblances to those.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And if the superfluities are thick, then wash your winds with wine of age, or water of santer, which is marjoram, or of anise, or of chamomile, and to those resemblances.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And if the wind is kept in front of a bath; and if it is administered after one or two hours, and if it sleeps next to the wind.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What is necessary that the phlebotomist be ruled so as to govern the wind-making before the winds are made.
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	And if you consider the beginning: then if the wind-maker or that which should be cerebrospinal is hot and blows on the head of inflammation, then take causes that cool; as with cold grains, and melons with sweet wine, and pomegranates with fresh water, and honey, and to those resemblances.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And pause their food thus: with little grains, and meats of small birds, and mixed foods with sweetness, and to those resemblances.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And if the constitution is of the age of youth, then take in drinking honey-water or honey-water of ashwagandha of sweetens, and salt, and wine slightly between meal and food; and that it be commanded that he uses little of drink and eating, and pause his meals of little grain and canaan and pisons and pet birds and pigeons.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And so that on the day of ventosisio and of flebotomia the drink is greater than the food.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And so that it is given in drink at certain times to some men a tonic or medicinal drink, of musk or alcelid before the ventosisio or flebotomia or appropriately, so that the main members are comforted and the blood is thinned; and it is not necessary for them to take that scaly wound.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	May the wounds that are to be sacrificed be those that are stopped with their own flesh and blood on the joints and heel, and the navel, because these members do not suffer from sacrifice.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And it is not desired for those except the attraction of blood from a member, so that with the pause of the wound on the breast in the flux of blood from the member's own wound; and they use that one to dissolve the firm wound of the member, so that with the pause on the belly and navel; because that thins out the member and scrapes it and causes pain because it resolves the wound.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And it is paused on the breasts when they happen in their operation or fever, because by virtue of the strong attraction of the leech's blood, the operation of the leech and the removal of the fever from its place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And it seems that when it is paused on the flesh and blood, there should be a firm wound in those who are clamped down.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	And these wounds are administered with juice only; and some are administered with fire.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And some wounds are administered full of running water in the navels of the patient.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And it is for that the wound is filled with water and made strong, or is water in which herbs are boiled to make it fit.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Form of wound administered with fire: the width of the opening should be two fingers wide, according to how we have formed it; and the quantity of the poison should be a quarter of an ounce; and it should be on the back side of it in its orbit, most of it, the trail should be small, according to the quantity that enters it a needle.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	It is made of dried blood or citron, with large edges, lion, whale and tiger's bile in order that it not lead the member out of its own position.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And it is at the middle of it a transverse pole of dried blood or iron, where it is paused with candle to fire.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And this wound is greater than that which we have described before; and the smaller of that, according to the navels and the condition of the person who uses it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the wounds of old men and debilitated people are other than the wounds of young men and big-boned people.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the quality of stopping this wound with fire on the member is that it extend the meat to the fire with a decent amount of candle-wax, and stop it in the middle of the transverse pole in the middle place of the wound, so that the fire be kindled from the start of the wound so that it does not burn the patient'
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And it is paused on the member of the patient, and the trail on which we have said, until when we have opened the wounds and do not want to hold the trail and cause the vapor to rise over that trail, then stop the wound so often dissolved.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And he lights the meat according to his way, and repeats that if you do not want to hold it.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	May the wound that is administered in the navel of the patient, with water, which does not have a transverse pole or trail, and is not administered but filled with water, and it is paused on the member only.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this form of it: This wound, how much greater it is, the better it is, so that it may receive a great quantity of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Chapter xcvii.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Sanguineous wounds are not administered in motz members but in the members in which it is not possible to make positions of wounds, because of their smallness, or otherwise with the pot and gingiva and similar to them; or in a naked member of flesh, so that it seems like its own.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those which you have found blood-vessels that are in the clean water of a river or spring.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And they should be laid down in the morning and washed in clean water until they are hungry, and that no disorder occurs in the abdomen of them; and it is evacuated from the body with flebotomia and ventosisio; and it is rubbed on the member of the patient until it turns red; and they are paused on it.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And so they are filled and case.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if it is possible to obtain juice from the wound, it is better to delay with treatment.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	But if not, then wash the place with vinegar and prepare some water; and it should be rubbed and pressed.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the member is prolonged, then put the place where the blood-vessels are to rest in running water; and let it be covered with a cloth, and pause it on it until the residue is washed away.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the wound multiplies, then powder on it with trissated vitriol, or boil and similar to them of the stinging causes, until the wound is dried up; or the places are paused on it where the beans of cooked eggs are, and they are laid down until the beans stick to the place, and the wound is dried up.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And so, if necessary, a repetition of blood-vessels when it can be done to change them.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if the blood-vessels are forbidden to suspend, then rub the place with fresh blood or hold an awl in the places until it stings; and they are paused on it, because those who do not feel any pain so often pause.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want them to stop hurting, powder on the wound with a little of dried aloe, or salt, or ash; and sometimes often rub it.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	As such begins the process of healing of the third part: of restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is necessary in the art of medicine; and it is restoration of a fracture and accidental dislocation in the bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh, son, know that these medical men boast of this chapter, and vulgar ones who never in their time have looked at the books of the ancients or read a letter from them.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason it is made that this way of the scientists in our land is kept secret; and I have not forgotten it at all in any season from all of them, and have not applied it except by a long reading of the books of the ancients and study on their understanding, until I drew out science from them.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And I have devoted myself to experimenting and studying in the length of my life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have already written all this in this chapter as my science; and what it contains of my experiment and study in the length of my life; because it is not necessary for me to explain any further here what I have written about my experience, since it is explained in two other chapters that precede.
Capitol primier.	Chapter first.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	The greatest and most complete treatment of broken bones, from which the following explanation is necessary before we begin to consider the various defects of each individual member.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Thus, in the preface to this chapter, let us state the greatest and most complete treatment of this subject, which will make it necessary to consider at length each individual defect; for then the craftsmen will know or learn from those who already know and can practice this noble art better than you.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And therefore say that when it happens to one of the fractures or dislocations or twists or jolts, at first you should cauterize or cut off the part concerned, or both together, if it is not forbidden by some cause, thus gradually removing the harm with virtue, or if it is a fracture which has just occurred, or if it is in decrepitude, or if it is during a time of violent heat, or of intense cold.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	Then provide himself with a diet of green herbs and meat of fowls and crabs; and forbid gross meats and any food that fills the veins with blood, unless you are certain that there will be no effusion of matter into the member.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	Then return the patient to his normal position first by the way he usually lies.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And therefore say that when the broken bone begins to be restored, let the patient eat nutritious food of meat and fat and heavy and thick in which there is viscosity, also food made from wheat ground with water, and rice, and roots, and feet, and bellies of cows, and geese, and fresh fish, and such like food, and at this diet a coagulability of the fracture will be achieved more gently and more easily.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And know that bones break in old people and in decrepitude it is not possible that they should continue or be consolidated according to their nature by the drying up of the limbs of them.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they are consolidated and continued according to their nature at all times by the drying up of those limbs, and they continue to be consolidated and remained such that they have become solid at the end of laziness, as do the bones of children.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	But nature itself, by its arrangement and attachment to the broken bone, in any way that adheres and strengthens it until it is joined together, so that it comes to an end of strength and firmness; thus fire at first, so that by some cause it does not prevent those works from being done.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason you must pause the patient's food, food in which there is gravity and viscosity and thickness, as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	There are different types of fractures according to the different member.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And know that the kinds of fractures are different according to the different members, a fracture of the hip bone is different from a fracture of the head bone; and a fracture of the foot bone is different from a fracture of the leg bone; and all the other members are different from each other.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And I will present before you the entire species of fractures, separated in a separate chapter from the others.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	There are different types of fractures within themselves.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	There are different types of fractures within themselves; for it happens that a fracture is curved in some places and not in others; and some are caused by the impact of a hard object, and others by the fall from a height: and there is a fracture due to pain and disturbance in the head, and a small fracture.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And to each species of fracture is assigned its own peculiar pain or trouble in the restoration; for it will be remembered separately in its place.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	There are different signs of a fractured bone.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And this is recognized by the curvature of the bone, and by its eminence and appearance when it is felt; and it is recognized by the bone when it is held in your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And therefore when it is not in the apparent curved position and does not cause great pain when touched by motion, then there is no fracture; but if the patient has great pain, then he must have a broken bone.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	And in the meantime it may be a curvature or a small fracture, so that you do not feel it when you hold it in your hand and press it together; but pause for a moment from the medicines of which you have a reminder that moment when you put it on; and make it tight by tightening it slightly.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And know that when the site is curved and does not split into two or another, except for the fact that it is broken in its whole length, then you must begin immediately to correct it by cauterizing it where it has happened; because if it is not corrected immediately, there will be a serious consequence.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if cauterization has been applied to it, then leave it alone for a few days until the swelling stops; and make it move in any way you can, by levitation or by another method.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And know that the restoration of it and the reduction of it is more gentle than with the bone in which this has happened.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	Then make it strong by what will come next, when you remember it.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	But if the bone is broken in two parts, then it is necessary to separate them by two feet or more, if it is the arm or the leg; or by two hands or by one hand and a foot.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	Then place the limb in a position where it will not be moved by your own movement; and if those parts which are broken have been spread out from the limb, then you must make an incision so that they may move again into their natural place; and do this in such a way as to facilitate their return to their natural place.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And take care that nothing happens to the patient through your own operation or injury; and do it in such a way as to be able to apply the bone to another, according to its best form.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And in this hour you can take advantage of touching that member by yourself; and if there is any other reason, correct it and bring it together by the quantity of your strength.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	Then do not make an excessive extension or compression; for this would cause an unnecessary apoplexy by the operation of the muscles, or a constriction of the limb, as when we saw it by the operation of the muscles of the leg.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	Then make it fast and secure, and apply a smooth operation to it, and rest and quietness; and let the patient be in such a position that he does not feel pain; for when you put the limb into a position where it hurts, this is because of the cause by which it was broken; but if you change its position so that it does not hurt, then you should make sure that it is secure, so that the limb does not have any curvature when restored.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of the limb's relaxation is what I recommend; for you should know that broken limbs are different in their smallness and size and shape.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And of those that are small like a bird or a bee; so that the wrapping be with a thin cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	And of those that are large like the hip or the back; let there be a thick wrapping around it, for when the tight wrap is applied to a large limb with a strong hold, it connects the limb in all its parts with a severe grip, and thus prevents the spread of the fracture.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And then start, and your evacuation of the fluid, pause in a convenient way in water, on the spot of that fracture with three wrappings or four according to whether the member deserves it; and strengthen your hand a little by the joint.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And then see if the patient is in a more stable position on the side of the fracture, and strengthen your hand that does not hold the joint; and tighten it as much as you can.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	And then extend yourself a little bit more in the joint of the fracture, and soften your grip little by little until you feel it start to move.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	And then take another object and wrap it over the joint with three wraps, and then see if the wraps can be moved a bit more from the fracture; and your operation in the grip of the joint and softening of that as I have said in the first wrapping.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And then pause between the wraps of leather or cloth wrapped around the joint where the curvature of the fracture is; if there is a curvature in it; and do not pause for any reason.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And then pause over another object, and then wrap it tightly with the help of a stick as much as possible if there is no inflammation or effusion at the site, and then pause over that water where that effusion or pus is found, and leave it for some time; and then tighten your grip on that.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And the sticks that make up most of the joint should be made of cane, and it should be formed wisely; or they should be made of oak; or they should be made of palm branches; and the width of each stick should be according to this form and shape:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	But also that the stick that is paused over that fracture should be a little thicker and a little further away from the other sticks than those; and the length of the stick according to its magnitude and smallness; and then tighten on the sticks with another object according to your first grip, and then loosen it little by little as I have said in the grip; and this is your grip according to the site of the fracture, and how much it is away from the fracture, the more it is away from the fracture, the less is the grip.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And also that the threads should be of medium thickness and thin, and if they are thick, then cut them with a sharp knife by stopping in between those strings of leather, and it is a great mistake to stretch the joint too much; for if you stretch it, the grip will be equal.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And especially thin threads are not convenient, because you will not be able to get a grip with them; and it is not convenient that there be space between one stick and another of up to a finger.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient is seated or lying on his side, pause those of leather or woolen thread between the sticks in order that they do not damage him.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Some fractures are caused by a blow, and it happens that the tendon is interrupted, and I come to remember in those of the capitulum according to its uniqueness.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And you should know that a broken limb does not heal with sticks in the first day; and this is because the limb, if it is large, does not hold up to the pressure of stopping on the sticks for one day or two or more, according to your confidence about the coming of an effusion.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	This is the way that the ancient physicians used to treat, who placed them over a fracture and dislocation and torsion.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	A method of treatment as a shower of restoration for a fracture, complex in nature and more so for women and children, because it is cool to the touch and does not cause friction: and you take powder of flour, and that is the dough; and that moves with the movement of the mill on the sides of the millstone.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And then see if it is suitable, but rather take it as it is, and pause the process of it that is not thin nor subtle; and then use that.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another way of dressing wounds healing fractures and dislocations and twists: Take assa-fetida, laquemum, acacia, anise, and mirra, which is called the grain of salvity, all in one dragon; myrrh and aloe in another dragon; alochile in a third dragon; and all are to be finely ground and mixed with either water or with the white of an egg if the patient’s complexion is scarred; and then use this plaster for it confers good composition and restores broken bones lightly, and gives health to many men.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another way of dressing wounds healing fractures and twists: Take myrrh and aloe in one dragon; mirra and aloe in another dragon; acacia in a third dragon; and bole armeniac in the fourth dragon.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All threads should be mixed with mortar to make a paste, and they should be thinned out with water or white of egg, and given to the patient.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	A method of treating joints and separated bones from their sites, and it is pain to happen in them or cracks and fractures: take wool thread and dip it in wine vinegar and olive oil, and then pause it on the site.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	It is not useful for this plaster to restore, to expel an effusion of fluid, or to remove pain in particular.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another way that plaster restores a broken limb: take leaves of fig tree and leaves of poppy sauvage; grind them all into a paste.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida .i.; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	A method of fresh plaster administered for the restoration of fracture of bones and when you want a resolution of an effusion: take razes of mint, chamomile, violet flowers, flour of erba, all of which. i. All threads should be thinned out with water if the limb is not scalded.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	But if it is scalded, then take it with water of coriander or with water and use that.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another way to treat it strongly in resolution than the first, when an effusion is caused: take razes of mint, hyssop, marjoram, violets, chamomile, all of which; all threads should be thinned out with water if the limb is not scalded. But if it is scalded, then take it with water of coriander or with water and use that. In any case, all these ingredients should be boiled in a piece of cloth. All these threads should be thin if the member is swollen.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	But the Hippocrates did not say that a plaster placed on the injured limb should be removed and dried, but rather that it should be made with a certain material, and this is to be applied over the limb with its injury; and also that it should not be made of any material other than those mentioned in this text.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	But the Quailia is also seen that it should be placed over the injured limb for its restoration and to treat the causes of its drying up with a small quantity of calamine, as with myrrh, and like those causes that we have recommended.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	A method of plaster that is applied to a wound and pain: take ground pepper, garlic, hair of men or feathers, and salt; all ingredients should be mixed together as thick paste; the threads should be thinned out with water if necessary; it is made of those ingredients in order. All threads should be thin.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	But the quantity should be according to which is able to keep the bandage in place and then remove it, and if there is no pain or injury nor is the bone broken, the member does not hurt him from his site; then you do not remove it with a certain number of days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if it happens to the place of violent pain or pricking or swelling, then you lie down or shift it at that time, and apply the poultice to him.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	And take a cloth and dip it in marine water, and submerge that in boiling water, and wash that place until the pricking or pain subsides and the pain is soothed; then let rest the limb for an hour; and place wool soaked in wine or rosewater on him, and lay that on him for an hour until you are sure of a blister, and that the swelling of the limb stops, and its pain is relieved.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then repeat that slight constriction and small poultice and do not tighten it due to your first tightness, and wash lightly that place so that it is healed.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if all those pain and swelling and all those accidents have been completely relieved and poultices and constriction no longer help him, then you repeat that same treatment as the patient recovers his strength.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o .vii.; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if nothing happens to the limb of those things that we have said, then do not lie down on it until three or four or five or seven days; And some women treat all that for twenty days according to how the limb breaks down, and if it is not broken, then let rest on top of its clotting, as we have said;
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	Then tighten it more than in your first tightness, and adjust the thickness of the patient's food according to how his memory returns.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	And if you find that the broken place is completely dry and exhausted more than it can cover, then know that food cannot reach him; and therefore dip him in marine water completely so that he is wet, and be that way for three days; and ease a little constriction, and with this operation restore movement to the limb, and it will be slightly healed.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	And if he does not restore the broken limb completely the first time, according to how it covers, and restore it according to its tortuosity, is an error according to its operation, and a great fear, and if he should make him grow larger the ancient joints in his free state, and go up with him into the water.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And I have not seen anyone do this to him before, so it is reasonable that he does not do it.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Capitol according to: Of the fracture when it happens on the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The types of fractures are different, and the causes are distinct, since some fractures are caused by impact with a spike, and that impact breaks all the bone inside it, and leaves it broken, as if it were broken by a blow in one place, and perches on the back of the other; and this type of fracture is called "absolute levitation."
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the plague of these two fractures is either great or small, and the fracture that is contraction or atrangement; and its cause is impact with a stone or falling from a height, and they are similar in appearance.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture is either perforating so that it brings the skin near to the bone, or in the face of the bone; and the plague of these two fractures is either great or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And some fracture is that it softens in the bone, in the subtlety of fine hair, and this type of fracture is called "capillary fracture."
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And it is a fracture that is caused by impact with the ground or by impact with a stone, and similar to what happens, which makes some of the bone's layers enter inside, and is broken in the hollow place as if you were to break them when they are inside, and this type of fracture is called "perforating fracture."
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	And mostly it is broken here in the bones of humans, as if they were caps of candles.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And all these special fractures are deadly, and that is how they are called.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And I come back with a memory of all this in its place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And I have discovered all these special types of fractures by detection on those and by questioning them, and by noticing the corruption of flesh that is on them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And the capillary specialty is known by the blood that is discovered on the bone, and it is washed, and it is not noticed on it because the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	And in the treatment of fractures consider at first the patient' s accidents, and if you find by manifest sign that it means pain, as if it were vomiting from cholera, and ekstasis, and loss of mind, and absence of breath, and fainting, and high fever, and a smell of the body and its heat, and similar things to those accidents in major situations, then do not heal.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if you do not find these non-correctable accidents, then begin to heal him.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	And the cause is because if it came to you with plague in the beginning and it is plagued, and that is the way it is in the twelfth day according to all dispositions.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is in the summer days, then know that you will heal the bone before the seventh day, and let rest the bone in front of you while that is left behind the skin, and that happens to the patient' s accidents as we have said.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has reached the skin that covers the neck, and is broken into small pieces and atranging, then know that you will break the broken piece according to what I recommend.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And that you remove the head of the troubled patient, and discover what is on the bone according to custom and its way, and let it be slight on the patient.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if it happens to you, the bone' s detection, and blood or blister cauterization, then pause him with water that cools him down, and let it be quiet in the place of the blister, and it is certain of blood loss; and when you are sure of the blister, and start working on the bone' s circumference and removal.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And let that be according to one of two ways of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the first way is that you break the bone with a straight knife, and this is how it is done: And then administer another knife like this one, slightly smaller than that one; and this is how it is done:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And then administer a larger knife more than the second one.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And let there be different knives whose some are larger than others; and some of them are smaller than those ones, and they are sharp in their tips, and made of iron or steel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use them easily on the knife that does not cut the head and that one cuts it.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is strong and hard, then know that you perforate it before administering the knives on its sides, which are called  "non-deep taravels."
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And they are not called that way because those do not stop the end of the bone from the water that is above it, as if it were a small circle or margin on the bone, which prohibits being submerged and passing the bone' s substance.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	And it is convenient that you take many of these taravels, and the quantity of them depends on what each bone' s substance requires, until it is present in all the bones of the neck whose tip is sharp, and the length and brevity depends on the amount of the bone' s substance.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	And this is the form of three types of instruments: The quality of piercing into the circuit of a broken bone is that you pause the instrument over the bone and turn it around with your fingers until you feel that the bone has already been penetrated; and then move it to another place, and pause where all the thickness of the ray or surround it.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And then insert with the chisel between each break of the bone, and make that subtle pus which can be on it at the end of levitation, as I have said, in order to root out the bone, or with your hand, or for some other cause by any instrument which you will prepare for water, in such a way as to tanalize and forceps subtle.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And so that you keep with all care that the chisel does not touch any cause of cyphac.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And so when you have finished the circuit of the bone perforating, and separate from cyphac if it is continued to it, and extract that, with care and caution that races and engules that in the asperity of it from water that it is in the bone with another instrument similar to a chisel, but rather that it is pus thick and subtle than the other chisels.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if any part of the small and satagic bones remains, then take it with ease with water that it is necessary for you with instruments; and then curar the plague with leeches and wet those which we have said.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And another way of operation is very simple, far from fear, which says Gualia and the lauzec for great lausor; and this is the speech of it: It is necessary to you in the beginning that you start to uncover the joint of the bone in the place where the fracture is most violent and most obvious, so that when you have uncovered that joint and have paused apart him the extremities of this chisel soft and pleasant by which this is the form:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And that the lenticular joint is leon and not inscideys any cause, and the sharp joint is of it in two sides before in length, so that sometimes; that the lenticular joint is adjusted to cyphac at the face of it that inscides sharp in the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And then you hit with the chisel on one side a small malet within that you inscides all the bone with ease so that it is turned, and you are sure of the panicle that does not happen in it an accident that you fear in any way, and if the medicine was pus fol of all men and more ignorant of their; certainly, and if it was a dorment.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	And then if Rome any cause annexed to the bone of the panicle in some places of os, inscidira that of it at the extremities of the chisel that lenticular one, and releases that of it with ease, for it is released from it to no nocument and to no fear.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the panicle, and that which is abscidit or remains in the bone is the face of it, and there are in its asperity and satagies subtils, then you race that asperity and root out those satagies with razor subtil by which you have prepared the number, of various quantities so that it is possible to administer of them at any place the pus convenient for them and the most right of them according to that which you are lost your operation that bone trencat and the figure of it.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And so that you administer in your razor with the which rases the bone at the beginning the most late of those razors, and then use immediately him of the most subtil of it, and do not cease to make water according to continuity within which you arrive to administer the pus teon and the most subtil of all.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	But in any other small fracture capilar and subtle fracture, so that you administer care according to that which you are lost to the rectificación of it.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And this is a cause for not being used in all those who have studied in that art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And he wrote on it that we have shown in great fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the panicle is retangut when you root out the bone, then take care that you take a cloth of it according to the quantity of the plague, and immerse that in oil rozat, and pause that over the orifice of the plague; and then take other cloth double or triplicat and immerse him in vi e oli rozat and pause that over prim-cloth and make water on that pus leugierament that you can about it, that does not strenhas cyphac; and then administer on that liament lat, and do not press that except for the quantity of the plague so only.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And leave that with this care for a day or two until you are sure of the apoplema caut; and then remove that and then administer medicines to those by which it is superfluous siccitat, so that rases of lin and flour of ers, and powder of enses and aristology, and similar to these.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And this is that you make of these medicines powder that you sprinkle on the plague, as they are dry; and universally, administer in that all medicine of property by which it is Abstergescac and not morderque.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And keep you according to your virtue that the plague in your cure is net; and is not in a surdicia of enguent or other; nor does you leave agreguar virulencia on it; for when it is adjusted on the panicle of the brain, corrupts that one and gives it that, and happens about the patient's leg.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And happens in the cyphac of the cap, from which it is mondificat the bone and more when it is expressed the cure of it, and is negror in the surface of it; and then consider at that time if it happens to the patient' leg those accidents that we have said, you would know that it is parnicioses all.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas .iii., e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it does not happen blackness but of the medicine that is paused on it, and is in the virtue of that medicine that makes that blackness, then you take of honey a part and of oil rozat parts. iii. and to them linen a cloth, and then pause that over the cyphac; and then cure that with the species of cure that are convenient within that be sanar.
Capitol .iii.	Capitol
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	of Restoracion of the nose when it is trincat.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	You would know that it is not trencat of the nose but two pieces of pus independent, or one of those alcunas screened, for so it has two bones, because the joint of them is cartilaginosa, and is not trencada and does not happen to it but atricio and tortuositat and sinuitat.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	But if it is trencada the one of the two parts of it, then you enter the dit petit in the nose of it, and that engualhas that fracture dedintz am the tieu dit indic, and with the dit pous defora, within that returns the nose according to its natural figure.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And be made by it for you with ease, and keep you that does not box by that your operation on the patient' legs.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the most independent party of the nose, and the dit does not perforate that, then it is equated to the extreme of the ray in which it is subtil thick.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in two parts, then you make the semblant of it.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And rest for you in the restoration of it on the first day that is possible; and then after, you enter to the seven or eight days to make a pause for the apoplema caut.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And enters in the extreme of the nose a cloth meca of prim, if the fracture is in one party, or metz two calguas, if the fracture is in two parties, and be it in the grossitut of such quantity that it fills the trauc of the nose.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And I said to some of the ancient restorers that the horses should be covered in cloth and that they should be changed every day, but it has not been seen by me; except that if the joint is covered with albumen from milk that has been powdered then leave it inside until the bone stops aching and the cartilage hardens.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And some of the servants are put between the nose, in place of the calva, otherwise it will be wrapped in cloth of lion that he is covered; and it is that already has broken the nose with force and that the patient is not forbidden to breathe.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	This cause is not necessary for you; and if you want, make water, and if you want, make calvas.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if another serva should break a tooth, grind it with cerume or with a piece of wood in vinegar and rosewater, or with a diamond.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	But if another serva does not break a tooth, then return that it is covered with flour of sizami and with powdered ensete cofigit mixed with albumen from milk; and place over it the skin of a lion, and do not put the nose in any way.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	But if the bones of the nose are broken or fractured, then return that you split over them, and extract them with instruments suitable for them; and then sew up the split, and cure it with water that hardens and consolidates it, and with plaster suitable for it.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	And if there is a plague inside the nose, then return that you cure it with calvas and administer pipes of lead inside so that they are all cured.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter 2.4
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	Of the restoration of the mandible when it is broken.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the mandible is broken and the fracture is only outward, and not curved on either side, but bent towards the inside, then its perception is slight.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	And therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, then you introduce the little finger of the left hand into the mouth of the patient; and with ease if the fracture is on the left side of the mandible, then return it to its proper place; and move it slightly from the inside towards the outside, in the same way as you would move a tooth that has come out. And apply this to both sides of the break in the bone.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the fracture of the mandible has separated into two parts, then return that you administer extension of two parts according to their orientation so that the equation of it is possible.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if there is a dislocation of the teeth, then strengthen those from which you hope that they will break with wire of gold or silver or reed; and place them on the mandible that has broken, wrapped in cloth, and place it on a double sheet, and place it on the star-shaped thread, or a string of a single thread according to its length; and then return it above the other one so that the bond is established with ease, and that it does not break.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And order the patient to rest and be quiet, and stop his food being sour or bitter.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you think that the shape has already changed in some way, then return it on the third day; and then correct it as much as it has been altered, and cover it with flour of wheat, with albumen from milk, or with flour of cypress, so that you no longer have to remove the cloth from it, and place it on the leather of a lion.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And when it is joined and adjusted, then leave it as it is, that it does not fall until it has healed and strengthened the fracture; for if you move it before it has healed, this fracture will last three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if another serva should break a tooth, then return that you administer water to it that has been boiled twice, and that you mend the tooth that has broken.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is a tooth that has come out, then consider whether it is separated or stuck to the bone, then return that you administer water that hardens to the tooth in its attachment to the bone.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the hole of the fracture is small, then return that you widen it according to the quantity of your need.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And when you have stopped those that are hanging, and those that do not hang, return to the hole of the fracture if it is large; and otherwise place them over one of the leathery covers that you administer water to them so that they harden, and that they are healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	Of the restoration of the fork when it is broken.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	It has been broken on one side of the front part of the muscle, and this fracture is done in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	It has either been broken, or separated, or separated into two parts that do not hang, and this is difficult to restore; or it is like this that the fracture occurs in the hanging part, and this is difficult to restore; or it is like this that the fracture occurs in the tooth, and this is easy to restore.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And the operation in this case, when the fracture is a tooth, is that you bring two assistants, so that one of them holds the fork that has broken and moves it to the side; and the other extends the jaw at that split.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	And return it to its proper position with the teeth, so that it takes the shape of it as it was; and not in its little prominence or concavity.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if you are in need of an extension, then return that you pause the tickling of the patient with a cloth or with leather, and make it larger according to your need; and extend and raise the fork and cover it with your hand so that it covers the fracture as much as possible.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot put the end of the fork on either side, because it comes out to the front, then return that the patient is supported on his neck, and place a cushion over the muscle of it in half its size.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the assistant presses the muscle of the patient on its split sides so that the end of the fork comes out in the front, and then return it to its proper position with the teeth.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	But if you feel hanging of the fork and they are annoying, then return that you cut them off with ease.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is caught on the bone, then you will have to use an invention of it from one of the tools that you have administered water to, because you had stopped the fork from its attachment; and this tool can be made of wood or of iron, with which this shape has been given.
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And it looks like one of these [tools]; and make it larger according to your need for water, and according to the size of the bone or its length.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	But the length of it should be as much as possible for the operation; that there are two extremes, and one extreme is wide and the other is narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the dislocation of the tooth that you have extracted from the bone is wide, and certain that there will be a swelling after the operation, then return that you adjust the two lips of the tooth with sutures.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the dislocation is small, or you are afraid of swelling after the operation, then return that you use cloth and powder according to the quantity of the split in the tooth.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if there is a swelling after the operation, then return that you wrap it in vinegar and rosewater and vinegar; and place it over that.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	Might the stiffness of the bone when it is struck with a hammer and sectioned be that you put plaster made from flour mixed with milk of the hen, and place on top the lion’s foot, and aprop place the seed of the hen, if he is disturbed by that, and approprimate, for it is a long-winded one, and its latitudine is a palm or more away from there; and appropriately put two dusts over the foot and plaster; and approprimate a thin tablet of wood whose latitudine is three ditz in length and width similar; and approprimate wrap that around with cloth, and wrap this cloth around the tablet in the place on top of the fracture; and approprimate therewith as it revives, and turn that upside down over the neck and seed of the hen, let go of that seed and let go of the seed of the hen, and reduce that over all parts, and whenever the stiffness of the fracture by the stiffness goes down, and it is that which is hidden from you.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And then that the star does not break the broken bone; and so that you see the patient every day, that when the ligament is softened or you see the tablet has already been relieved, then you correct it and tighten the bandage.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And approprimate put the patient to sleep on his neck, and leave the seed of him in a small cushion; so that, from there, is raised the assistant of him by the lat of that, and thus is raised the fracture of the furcula to the elevation of the muscle; or be the arms of it tied to the neck of that.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not loosen the ligament unless an accident happens in the place immediately or swelling, within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And appropriately renew the plaster if you have seen the face of it to water, and adjust in the tightness and restore that and leave within that it is restored and is coagulated the fracture of the furcula.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And is strengthened and comforted according to the month in twenty-eight days, and some watched in some men is done in the time of that.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	Of the Restoration of a Shoulder Fracture.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	A spatula pie is broken in the place of it late and not broken from it but the edges.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And when it is broken the place of him — and is broken in the middle place of him — and is not known except by touch, then according that it is the figure of the fracture displaced you prepare it for him and reduce that according to the natural figure in all ways of engineering with which it is possible.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	And approprimate put over the place flour dust mixed with milk of the hen and lion's foot; and approprimate put cloth dust in two folds; and approprimate put over the tablet a thin board according to the quantity of the spatula whole or less a little.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	Then if the seed is concave in some places of the spatula, then you swallow that concave with lion' s foot, and approprimate put the tablet according to equality.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And approprimate tighten it with a long hand from its contraction and its tightening of the tablet within that it is not relieved from its place.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And consider the ligament every day; and all watched that it is softened, another watch and tighten it and equalize the tablet if it is relieved from its place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And beat the patient over his lat.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	And the spatula is restored in twenty days or in fifty.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	Then when this number is completed, then you dissolve the ligament, and that you know assuredly because that is of the bones whose beginning is not painful nor its dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you break the place of the bone that is heavy and put away the cord, then you cut it over it, and stop it, and do according to what I have said in the fracture of the furcula of sadness of swelling watch if it happens here.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	Of the Restoration of a Foot Fracture.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The foot in some watched is broken in the middle place of him and is pie broken therein; more the extremities of it are broken that they are ciccadas and comminuted.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And of the accidents of him when it is broken in the middle of him is that it declines to the insides and happens to him great pain, and difficulty in drinking, and coughing, and holding himself strong and vomiting blood; and is declared in his cavity in the broken bone and is not hidden from feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And the restoration of it is that he is raised up the patient on his two feet, and put between the shoulder blades of him a cushion; and approprimate press the muscles of him, and adjust the ribs of him to the sides of the two sides, and subtily you in the operation of him and in the equality according to all ways that it is possible and that convenes to water, within that he returns the figure of the bone according to what I have said.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	And approprimate put the plaster and tow over it and open a thin board of wood or of caligari and of its resemblance in levitation, because you wrapped that around with cloth; and approprimate subtilize in tying that on the broken bone that is not relieved; and go to the bandage according to roundedness of the back of some watched, and tighten that by the tightness going down; and approprimate consider the bandage every hour, and whenever it is softened tighten that.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	And if necessity causes to the relief of that deves corrosion or pruziment, or pain, or swelling which happens in the place, then you cut and destroy that and eradicate the plaster and correct it that is happened by water according to the way of curing him; and appropriately reduce the plaster, if times to water the face; and adjust the tightness within that he is healed.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	Of Restoration of Ribs When They Are Broken.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	Know that fracture of the ribs does not happen except in large places which touch each other; and from the extremities of them from the insides do not happen to those contusions except by water because they are cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And the knowledge of it is not hidden from feeling because of the question of it to the sides of the six.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration is also that it is united the fracture according to the ways that are possible, within that it is swallowed according to what I have said; and approprimate plaster and tighten the bone broken with the stela, if you are disturbed by that.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And if the fracture of the ribs is declining to the insides, then happen to the patient great pain and punctures, and so happens to that which has wept, and by water because the bone is put under the veils; and happens to the difficulty of cleaning, and coughing, and vomiting from a strong pain; and this one is difficult to heal.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And already the Ancients are prepared in that with strong medicines.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And of them so that you say: Heal the patient who has made a swelling go down and ventilation, because his belly is swollen and extended, and the fracture is driven to the insides.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	Then we should prepare it by water because it is not likely to cause swelling to generate, if it happens; and if it has happened, then help is already with it.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And some of them say that it should be stopped from ventilation and approprimate drink with strength; and is similar to reasoning, however, it is feared that ventilation will throw the excesses to the place because of weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	And some of them say: Cover that place with a wool that has already been submerged in oil, and let the powder be between the ribs within that it is filled, that the bandage be tight when you wrap that around according to roundedness; and approprimate heal the patient with the cure of pleurisy and ventilation and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if a violent constriction causes the loins not to endure, and the bones of the loins cause pain by puncturing their veils, then wait until they break into place, uncover from the broken ribcage, and immediately remove that instrument which contains the cypher, whose memory is preceded, and which carves the bones easily, and removes it.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	Then let them adjust the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a wound, and treat that with plaster within to heal.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if pus comes out inside, then let them cut and pour rosin powder in oil and place it over the area, and wash the loins with water that covers the pus inside.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And let it be raised over the bed on which he sleeps, so that it may heal.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter .IX
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	Of Restoring a Fracture of the Spine in Two and the Neck.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Some broken bones of the neck, and also to their atricles, and similar to the spines of the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And if water comes out a lot and you want to know if it will heal or not, then consider, for often their muscles are already weakened and stupefied and dead and cannot stretch them or strengthen them and when you pinch them with a needle there is no pain in them, then you will know that it does not heal, and in the same situation it is deadly.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if those muscles hurt when pinched and pricked, then you will know that the spine of the bone is saved and that the loins are healed with medicine.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you see the spines of the neck similar to water and want to know if it will heal or not, then consider the feet.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	If you find that they are already weakened, and water comes out which happens in most cases, and when you stand on their back, there is wind and excretion of their own will, and some broken backs rise up on their back, and they want to urinate but cannot, then you know that it is deadly, and do not work on their healing.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	Maybe if there is no cause for those, the cause is better and lighter.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	The healing of the loins is that you pierce into the space behind the spine with olive oil, or with a needle full of herbal tar; place over that tar sometimes, and let it rest inside for some time until the pus is healed.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	Then place one of the plasters that remain comfortable and existing, and strengthen it with a thread; and order the loins to rest and be peaceful, and not sleep on the bed where they are uncomfortable, so that they may heal.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if the fracture of the bone is severe or there is some cause that has already separated from it, then wait for it to dry on the bandage and sew those bones together; and immediately adjust the two lips of the wound, with sutures if it is large, and immediately treat those with blood clots inside them, so that they may heal.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	Maybe if the back of the bone is broken, and it is the end of the spine, then let them enter with the left hand into the back, and join the broken bone with the other hand as quickly as possible by means of a thread; and immediately place plaster over it and tie it up, if you are tired of those, and strengthen that.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel severe fractures on your loins, then let them sit on that, and strengthen it, and treat the wound with medicine that precedes to heal it.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De restauracio de la ancha.	Of Restoring a fracture of the spine.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the neck, if broken, then that fracture is not different in its ends and is spread out along its length and declines towards the fractures inside; and pain in the area occurs when it is broken, and the chest is stupefied when the fracture happens.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	The healing of that is that you stretch your hand over it so that it is above the fracture, which is the shape of the spine.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	And if that fracture is only at one end, then you drink that water in order to assemble it again according to its natural shape.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	Maybe if the fracture is long or has already declined towards the fractures inside, then you prepare your loins to heal that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And then when you have healed that, place plaster over it, and strengthen it with a thread or bandage, and do not fear the fracture's puncturing or moving of the stelha.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And drink the concave shape with water that fills it up, so that it keeps equal, and order the loins to sleep on their back or keep their sides open.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	Maybe if you have pus inside, then stop the spreading of it and the healing of that pus until it is healed, and place water on it according to what precedes; and immediately return to the healing of your loins, and strengthen it with a thread or bandage.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if the bone is severed or broken into pieces, then you join them together.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	Of Restoring a fracture of the assistant.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	The assistant is the shoulder that is between the ribs at the top of the shoulder blade.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	The healing of that is in two ways, the first of which is that you take a small piece of wood and make it with a thread or bandage, and this is how you heal it:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And tie the two ends of those threads together, and then hang them from an elevated place.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And order the loins to lie on a pillow; and immediately cut off the end of the arm that is broken, so that it reaches up to the middle of the back where the curve of the shoulder begins, and the limb is attached to that curve.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	Then suspend it over some difficult cause, or let the medicine flow into the fractures inside; and immediately bring the fracture together again, so that the fracture returns according to what precedes.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	The other way is that the loins are raised above their necks and strengthened with a thread; and order two servants to hold one of them by the water, which opens the fracture with its hands, and another holds the pus away from it; and each of them stretches their side.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	If you want the spreading to be stronger, then let them stretch those sides with two threads or bandages and each of the servants stretches their side.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And if the fracture is close to the end of the muscle, then it should be held in place at its middle over a pillow and the other end of the muscle is broken into pieces.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And if the fracture is close to the shoulder, then it should be held in place on that spot and on the shoulder itself.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Drink water easily, and do not be afraid of a fracture if it occurs; then strengthen that when it is healed, and if you do not have water, then find a way to obtain it.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	Maybe if you have pus inside, then release it on the seventh day, and place over it a fine woolen thread soaked in olive oil within vinegar until the pus is healed, and then strengthen that.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	The way to strengthen that is to place plaster over the fracture, and then cover the plaster with a drape: and then adjust the arms over the assistant, and place their hands on their shoulders.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And put the drape and stretch over the assistants' arms so that the arm is in place of the foot, if it is not prohibited by any cause of broken bone.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	Then use a staff.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And it is that you pause over the fracture those staff which is put beside and stronger than the others staves; and pause between each staff the thickness of the said, and be the length of the staves according to the fracture adding three inches of all side.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	Then stretch over the staves in the width which was mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And it is that your width over the place of the fracture be wider.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And when the fracture is shorter, make the width smaller.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	So if you place the situation of the staves and the width as we have said at the hour in which you restore the member to its position, then do so.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear gangrene, leave the width and the staves inside on the seventh day as we have said before.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	Then consider the member in all parts for three days so that no happens in the place inflammation or swelling; or is prohibited the food reach to the member by disposition of superfluity of width; and then correct everything according to what we have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	But if you are sure that there will not be any cause of that, then do not untie the bandage until three days or more have passed.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And let it sleep in his bed on its back, and its legs be over the stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	Then put on the assistant's foot a full bed of wool and consider in all hours of the night or the day that there is not broken the figure of the broken member, or that the joint is soft; then correct everything according to your virtue.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	Then put the food of the patient according to the order which we have said before, that the food be not heavy at the beginning but becomes stronger; then cover when it becomes thick.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	And it is that the custom of the assistant and the patient's leg be strong in ten days; and then cover them, and let it be given a bath and be medicated with ointments which correct that.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is stiff, then do not untie the joint and the staves from that day or from two months.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	Of Restoration of a Fracture of the Arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The arm is composed of two bones which are called two shafts; the one is small and is that which is said to be below, and the other is large and is that which is placed on the side away from the small said, from the starting point more distant.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And the heavy shaft is broken alone, or the small one, and the tips of both are strong.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when the small shaft is broken above, then the restoration of it is easier, and its healing is faster.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when the shaft is broken below the fracture, the healing of it is difficult, and its healing is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And worse than that is when two bones are broken together.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Then if the broken bone is the small shaft above, it is convenient to the doctor, considering the restoration of it, that it be covered with a thin bandage easily within that it be covered.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	But if the large shaft is that which is broken, then cover it with a thick bandage violently.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both shafts are broken together, then cover them with a strong bandage tightly.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	Then cover the figure of the patient more tightly than for its restoration and its extension on a cushion, and be the hand of the patient over the parts above, as well as all others said, and the ear be placed in a bowl-shaped base.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	Then a cushion before him in height or behind him, so that the patient does not work hard.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	Then the minister extends the arm from the starting point more distant to the hand of the patient or to the joint, and another minister extends over it gently.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	Then the doctor covers the bone within that it is not seen again according to the best figure that can be made.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if in the fracture of the bone there are no signs, then do not use any ointment at all according to your virtue.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if in the separate fracture there is no pain or does not respond to your expectations in the restoration of it, then do not use any specific method above it and let it heal by itself.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	But if the fracture is due to pain, I have already written a special chapter on it, and therefore take that treatment.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if a gangrene occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then you will prepare a paste of ash and salt, and let it rest for three days; then put on staff over that fracture more distant and stronger.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	You know that the number of staves of the arm is two when the fracture is in one shaft or in both together.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	Then stretch over the place of the fracture more strongly and violently, and when it is less painful to remember it in the beginning of the chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	The blankets which are wrapped around the fracture should be soft and moist, not hard or sharp, and the string to secure them should be thin, as we have said before.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	Then consider the member and the bandage for three days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if any cause occurs that requires a correction, such as when you are applying pressure to the member with a string, then cover it with water gently until that pressure stops.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	Then remove the member without stretching it so that it rests, and return to the width.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the width is already softened and the bone is almost healed with a good appearance, then correct everything according to your virtue.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	Then consider whether the food reaches to the member by superfluity of width, because it softens that slightly and leaves it for several days until the food is given again, then stretch it.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	But if there is no cause of those we have said, then do not untie the bandage until approximately ten days or more have passed.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	Then hang the patient by his hands above the ground with a strong rope for its movement to be active, and let him sleep on his back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	You know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or in thirty-two days, and it is restored strongly in twenty-eight days, and everything depends on the order of complicatedness and virtue.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	Of Restoration of a Fracture of the Hand of the Hand and of the Fingers.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	You know that for the hand and its fingers there is a different fracture, and it does not occur unless they are seen in motion.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	Then when the fracture occurs in the hand or in the fingers, then cover it with a long bandage before it and place the hand at rest on an object-like base, and let it rest for three days.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	Then the minister extends the broken bones of the patient and covers them with a bandage that is not too tight until they are properly joined together.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	Then put on a paste and ash, if there is not gangrene, and put staff over it according to the quantity of the place, and you have wrapped that in a drape.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	If the strain is on the inside of the wrist then place the palm of the hand down, and make a shape like an hourglass out of cloth, and order the servant to put pressure with their other palm against this one; also bind it tightly in long strips of cloth.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And place the piece of wood on top of the cloth so that it is applied to the palm; and tighten it in two places so that it covers well.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	If the fracture is on the outside of the wrist then cover and bind tightly two pieces of wood to the side of the palm, so that it is opened and turned towards the heel; and with this the hand is bound up tightly with bandages.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	And if the fracture is in any of the carpal bones then, if the bone sticks out, cover and bind tightly according to how it curves; and place a small piece of wood on top so that the fracture does not stick out anymore.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	If the fracture is in any of the other carpal bones then it should be covered and bound tightly according to the continuity of the bone; or, if this cannot be done, then a small piece of wood should be placed over that bone, as we have said about the little finger.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider in your treatment and bind tightly the joint of the thumb with the operation described above - when any cause of those is happening - according to how it has been told.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter XIV.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	Of the Restoration of a Fractured Bone of the Thigh.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The thigh bone that is broken and has been reduced to its normal position, and the head of the bone is above the joint, is not yet healed.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	The treatment of it is made as follows: the bandage is tightened over the fracture and another is left loose on the fracture, and the servant lies face down on his stomach and on his chest.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	Then the minister extends all the bandage according to the quality, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	If the fracture is in the middle of the bone then extend the bandage to its tail at the bottom of the joint, so that the extension wraps around; and leave the bandage loose on the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	If the strain is in the middle of the bone then extend the bandage to its tail at the bottom, and make the extension on the inside; and leave it loose on the outside.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	Then the doctor should join the bone to itself with a paste and bind it tightly, if there is no swelling in the member; otherwise, leave it loose.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	If there is swelling in it then you should leave it for a few days before returning to your treatment; and if the swelling goes down, return to your treatment.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The bandage should be made as follows: cover the fracture with a hard cloth, and fold it twice or three times, and trim off any excess; then wrap it around so that it reaches to the neck and to the root of the thigh.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And insert a long piece of cloth between the thigh and the bandage at the bottom near the joint, and bring the two ends of the cloth over the inside of the leg; then turn the cloth back on itself so that it covers the bandage; and trim off any excess.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	Then place over the thigh in the place of that fracture a piece of cloth, and place one on top of the bone of the leg.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	Then fill the spaces between the bandage and the thigh with soft cloth so that it is kept from sticking to the skin.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	Then begin the firm bandage on top of the fracture with three or four folds; and if you are moving away from the site of the fracture, your bandage should be looser and lighter and wetter.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	Then extend the two ends of the cloth to the inside of the thigh until it reaches the heel of the foot; and tighten both ends of the cloth on the outside of the other half so that the bandage does not come off its place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	Then leave it there for a while, until then no swelling or swelling or swelling occurs in the member; and if any of those causes occur, then wait for it to settle down, and correct what has happened as far as possible, according to what we have said about broken fingers.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is heavy then cover it according to what is possible for you; and if not, place it on top of something, and cure with water from which it has been prepared, within time it will be healed.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	In some cases this fracture of the thigh is strengthened by the bandage that is tied around it as we have said in the Adjuncts and Arms.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	However, in the treatment of it in this way, there is no need for the servant to walk with a limp; and if it is treated alone, another cloth should be applied to it, so that it walks with a limp from then on.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	You should know that the thigh is strengthened in ten days or a few more months or a few less months, and all this is according to the diversity of complexions and other dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	Of the Restoration of a Fracture of the Ankle Bone.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	You should know that a fracture of the ankle bone at the back is not yet healed, and it may take time for healing to occur.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	If there is a fracture, then it is not yet a crack or a tear in the joints; and if there is swelling or pain, then follow the instructions above according to that.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	The treatment of it is made as follows: the bandage should be extended around the ankle and tied at the bottom of the joint; and if there is swelling, then follow the instructions above according to that.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	Then place paste on top of it; and tighten it with bandage as far as is comfortable for you; and bind it tightly in a way that it does not hurt.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	Then consider all the instructions that we have given for other fractures; and if there is swelling, then wait for it to go away before making any decisions about this, according to what is convenient for you within time it will be healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	Of the Restoration of a Fracture of the Leg.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	You should know that in the leg there are two bones which one is thick and called the femur; and the other is thin and called the tibia; and they join each other with the kneecap.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	A fracture of either bone in the arm is treated similarly to a fracture of the femur; and the treatment of it is the same as for the arm's bandage, and its operation is one and the same.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if both bones are broken at once then the leg becomes completely dislocated.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	If one of the two bones is broken from the front, then the leg becomes dislocated in the front.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	If the thick bone is broken, then it sticks out, and it is of those causes that are not familiar to you.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	Then administer an equal amount of acid and ligature to the joints according to that bandage; and do not add anything else to it.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	However, if the fracture of the leg is simple and there are no broken bones in front of it, then let the extension be short and lighter; and praise your own virtue.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	In the leg there is no need for any operation on the arms; and if you tie the joints tightly together then you will carry out all your operations with ease; and take care not to twist your hands in front of it, and do not tie them too tightly so that they are cut off from circulation; and be careful when tying them because of the smallness of the fingers, and do not use large knots, but rather use knots according to the length of the leg, and from the back forward to the smallest part of the hand.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And then wrap each sheet in two wrappers according to the length of them, and put one over the crotch of one leg and the other on the other leg, and they are on the inside at the bottom of the feet.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	And then place the two sticks in three places of the two extremes and at the middle, because with this configuration the back is prevented from bending to the right or left, and it is in good position.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And then a chest of wood is given according to the length of the back; and the back is placed on it so that it maintains its movement.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And mostly it is necessary that you pour water on the fracture, and when it has been done it is called properly gout.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And then consider the back every day and study it carefully, and you should keep it away from swelling and inflammation or other similar causes; and when any of those causes happens, then do not pour water on it until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	Of the fracture of the talus bone and the bones of the foot and of the said.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	To the talus bone does not happen fracture completely; but to the bones of the foot happens fracture in some places; and to the feet of the donkey little happens fracture, and it does not happen to them except at the ends in the middle of disposition.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if to the bones of the foot has happened fracture and those bones are raised up above themselves between them, then return the patient to the ground prepared in this way while walking.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	And then place one foot on the water that is raised from those bones, and then trample them and press them, and put them back into their places.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	And then place plaster and stop on it, and leave the belly of the foot on a small table to which two heads are placed.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	And then strengthen that foot with the stretching downward, because you have wrapped it in sheets and for other reasons from which it suffers.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And after three or four days pass by, then remove the plaster because you would think that the bones are broken, or they are twisted or displaced, and the operation in those is done as with coneys.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	But if some donkeys are twisted, then restore them, and put those back as with the eye and carefully treat them in the restoration of the donkeys' eyes.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	And then place the twisted stick according to its length, and leave it on one side a little; and then return the foot to the table that you have been recommended, and strengthen it with the stretching downward.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	But if the stick that is twisted in the bones is two or three or more, then you place each one according to its quantity wrapped in a sheet of leather, and strengthen the table at the bottom of the foot, and let it stand on one of the heads of the table so that the belly of the foot remains in good retention.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is appropriate that you do not forget that you do not consider all the causes that have been said to you in other fractures of the accidents that we have mentioned; and then pour water on any accident as needed.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVII.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	Of the fracture of the cheekbone of the woman and the bone of the penis and the beard of the man.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the cheekbone of the woman is twisted, then make that cut in the middle of the teeth, and then tilt that at the end of the two little, and it should be held behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And then the woman's mother will wrap the cheek with gauze, and make it fast with a knot, and then the woman should be hit, and raise the two little bones little by little, because all this is outside the cheekbone until in front of the end of the cheekbone with a knot, and the twisted bone returns.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And then place powder on the two legs, and when he wants to urinate, he removes it with ease, and then pour water on it, and reduce it and return it according to the method that was mentioned in the beginning, and then return the first powder.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	Then do it for seven days or so, because that is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you want, take a little bladder and tighten it on the end of it a tube; and insert all the bladder into the cheek, and then blow into the tube with force until the bladder is inflated inside the cheek, because the fracture returns.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And then it should be filled with gauze and kept for several days as we have recommended, so that it is healed.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the penis bone of a man or woman is twisted, then administer in the restoration and injection of water that we have recommended in the bones of the leg.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And this water that is right does not hide these close fractures and little it happens to those who are in the middle of disposition in the restoration and the constriction of it, so understand well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	But in the beard of the man when it is twisted, take a cloth, and wrap the beard in it; and then place it wrapped up, and keep it wrapped for three or more days, and it will be healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	Of the Restoration of Fracture of Bones when it is infected.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient to you that the fracture has happened when it is infected, and mainly if the bone is large as with the cheekbone or the jawbone, or similar to that, that you protect it and boil water on it again and again if the conditions of boiling water allow you so to do. And here we have mentioned it.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the plague goes away by itself, then return to you in the retention of water for three days that you sprinkle on it as described above, and if there is no other cause.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And then begin to restore the fracture in a few days' time, and do not delay water, unless an apoplexy happens.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	But if the apoplexy happens carefully, then return to you in restoring it on the ninth day, so that the apoplexy stops, and do not approach to it until the third day of all, because you would cause bad accidents.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	But if the twisted bone is eminent over the cheekbone uncovered, then return to you in reducing it and putting it back on your side with ease and a little extension.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	But if the extension is not prepared and the equation of it with your sides, then you reduce it with your side with ease and a little extension. But this instrument is made of iron, its length is seven or eight days, and its width is according to the amount of plague; and for water it is necessary that the doctor take three or four according to the quantity that you need for water in the treatment of any type of fracture.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And then it is wrapped up, and it is a little bit small so that it does not double the compression on it at the time of the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And it should be of acute extremities, and then the one side of it is wide, and the other side is narrow, and then return to you in the restoration of it at the most; and from the middle of it, then return to you in the division.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	This is how it is done:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	It is named in Greek "labra volenztare atelaram", so it is a little palette.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	So that the end of the limb be raised on the other end of the bone that is eminent.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And then put it in a single-bladed scythe so that it returns to the bone, and place it on an equation.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And so, place the ends of the fracture next to each other, and if the broken end is delicate, and you do not have a good instrument for the operation, cover that end with something so that the instrument can reach it.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	But if you cannot reduce the bone at all before reducing it with the scalpel that we have described, then cut it with one of the scalpels that the surgeons have, or make a cut in some other way as best as you can.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	Then remove what remains in the bone of roughness and small cuts.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone has been reduced, and severe pain occurs in the patient's leg, then you will know that the bone has not returned to its natural position; and at this point, put a great deal of hope in it for the patient.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	And when your work is finished in restoring the bone, then cover it with a black salve, and especially if it is in summer, and do not place it on any plaster or other cause which might cause it to become dry, so that it does not cause damage or corruption.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And administer the medicine at the hour of the patient's death in order to complete the bone restoration, and leave the plaster uncovered so that it may be cut with scissors and wrapped up according to the amount of plaster.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And guard carefully that you do not damage the plaster with the fracture, for it may cause bad blood to flow, and the result might be death or severe corruption or decay, so that it is healed.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if the patient' stress breaks, it becomes soft, different from the stress of other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the plaster is large or is bad plaster and you fear a terrible accident due to the scalpel that we have described, and feel pain in that place, then do not cover it with a soft cloth, but wrap it tightly with hard cloth instead of the stelae.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And when the plaster begins to take shape in one or two days, which is a sign of good healing, then remove the cloth that you had placed on it, and administer calques, which we have described as being used for cleaning the plasters, so apply them while they are wet with the same medicine.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	Consider the plaster every day and night until it is fixed and firm, and cover that member so that it is prepared in such a way that corruption will run from it to the joints with ease.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	And if the plaster takes more than a few days to heal or to separate from the break, then you will know that these are false signs and that you should not trust them.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And of those false signs that remain and grow apart from each other, some make the member move and cause pain, then cut them according to what is possible for you to do it.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	And if the plaster begins to rot or turn black, then you will know that it is a sign of corruption and decay, so cover it with what we have described in order to heal it.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o .xxx.; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And so that your speech may be better heard and your present situation is clear: when the skin becomes thick, apply to the member as well as to the large bones of the hips and thighs, and do not trust in its reduction, nor in its growth, because bad blood flows through it, which can kill you; leave it uncovered for a few days so that it heals. And then heal the plaster if it is visible, and if not, leave it alone.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 23.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	Of the Cure for Fractures.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	This is a treatment for fractures in the form of a medicine that is applied to the bones' scars and is mostly used for members that are close to the joints, and strongly prevents their natural movement.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Then consider whether the treatment is recent and administer those medicines that have been used to treat it, and use them as needed; and if you can, apply a few drops of those medicines on the scar, and wrap them tightly with cloth to tighten the wound.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	And leave that scar alone for a few days; and then remove it and repeat the treatment again, until the wound has healed completely; or press tightly on that layer of lead, because lead has the property of holding together all that is inflated in the limbs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if the wound has already become hardened and is completely healed, then it provokes an ostar, and so cut it with a sharp blade, and separate its parts with a smooth movement, and make a cut in the front of the wound or behind, as needed, so that it may not be reopened; and heal that part that needs to be healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	Of the Restoration of Fractures. When a fracture has healed, and so return the member to its natural position, and do not restrict its movement.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture has healed, and so return the member to its subtle form, but do not restrict it except for necessary reasons: such as an excess of ligaments that prevent its movement from being natural; or due to a lack of nutrients reaching the member; or because of too many useless treatments; or due to excessive movement at the wrong time; or because of pain in the body's joints and because it needs to be calmed down.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	And the treatment for this is to feed the patient and make the heart strong, so that the pain multiplies in it; and administer baths and apply cold and soothing things to it.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	And then place something heavy on the member, so that the weight provides nutrition, or continue with excess treatment with water, so that the nutrition runs and returns to its natural form.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	Of the Cure for Broken Bones That Have Healed with a Twist and Preventing Their Operation from What is Necessary.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When the healed member has been restored with a twist and a bump in the bone, and it is in the form of the broken member, but the member does not prevent its natural operation, then you should know that this member comes from a new break.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	But already some few months have passed since the breaking and healing of these bones, and such an operation is most cruel and is done with great danger to the patient's life, which can be taken from it at any time.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	But if the claudication and nodulation are recent, then they are soaked in water with soft herbs, as well as leaves of mint and grass, and a few drops of oil of chamomile, and wrapped with a cloth; or that it is spread with a mucilage made from mint leaves, and that it be covered with a salve made of chamomile; or that it be smeared with olive oil, and that it be wrapped in a cloth; or that it be spread with a mixture of fat fig (olive) and that it be tressled with a thread of karamel, and applied to the wound; or that it is soaked in a warm milk, and wrapped tightly with cloth.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And sometimes it is dissolved with a gentle friction that is moistened, and is administered movement of the member at all times.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	But if the twist has already occurred before and has caused pain that is severe and is turned into a wound, then it should be treated with fire, because it can burn it; and that part that needs to be burned is removed, and continued treatment of the bone is given, and ease is given to the member that needs it, and care is taken with it.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter .xxiii.
De sermo en dislocacio.	On dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is when one of the joints of the body becomes dislocated, causing pain and damage to the member.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore when a dislocation occurs, it is necessary to pierce and reduce it quickly, for if reduced late, the joint is stiffened, and it becomes difficult to reduce the dislocation.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And so it is not necessary that it is stretched or bent at the time of the piercing, because if the muscle contracts it will cause pain and spasms.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	And when it occurs to you, hide yourself from the flab of the leg, and let the piercing be made within so that it rests; and let the member be broached with water and oil, and reduced easily.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And this member be washed with the water from which the memory will come to its place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And you have already ordered the chapters of dislocation according to whether they precede a fracture; from the higher part of the body to the lower.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter.xxiiii.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	On the treatment of a dislocated jaw from the lower jaw.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	So the two jaws are either dislocated from their places by little movement, and become slightly softened; or they are dislocated completely and completely, so that they are softened at the joint before saliva comes out of the mouth and cannot close it, and the tongue is wrapped in it.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	And when the dislocation of him is little, then in most cases return by themselves for a little reason.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	But if the dislocation is whole and complete, then it is necessary to administer a reduction of him little by little, and not be late at all.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And let the minister hold the head of the patient, and insert his finger into the mouth between the teeth of the dislocated jaw from within the mouth if the dislocation is on one side; or that he inserts both fingers together, if the dislocation is on both sides, and the other fingers are outside where they belong; and let him order the patient to cease moving his jaws, and perform the treatment in this position. And let the jaw be held in place and kept in position until it returns to its place.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if the reduction of him is difficult, and more so if both jaws are completely dislocated, then administer with water and oil, so that the reduction of both is little and not delayed at all, as we have said.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And so when it returns and is closed, and the mouth is not softened, then pause on those dusts of cloth with a needle, and make a stitch and oil thread; and let it be tied easily with a loose knot.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And let the patient lie on his back, and let his head be between two pillows, so that he does not swallow anything at the right or left; and do not let him pass by force any medicine; having the patient's food forbidden to him, so that when the pains return and the jaws are locked, then let him drink what he wants.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And let it be administered easily, and do not work on the opening of the mouth before eating and drinking and calling, so that the jaw is locked and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if the reduction of two jaws is difficult when they are dislocated at any time and do not return to their places, then fever and constant sodium occur, and the abdomen of the patient swells up, and strong nausea and pure colic occur.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you find it, then know that it is a loss; and mark the one on which it occurs within ten days.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter.xxv.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	On the reduction of a dislocated furcade and extremity of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The furcula is not dislocated from its place by the continuation to the feet; and some are dislocated at the end of it, and then it is felt.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And the restoration of him is that the patient jumps on his back and spreads his legs.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	Then cut the place with your hand firmly, for it will return.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	Then pause on that paste and dust, and strengthen it.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	And the extremity of that which seizes you and continues to it is not dislocated in any day; then it is necessary to reduce and tie it according to what we have said, and according to your apparatus.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	Then pause on that paste, and dust, and tighten it, and command the patient to remain quiet and at rest until it is healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And in this treatment the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter.xxvi.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	On the reduction of a dislocated muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	Know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways; and one is that it is dislocated from the end of the rib to the end of the collarbone.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is that it is dislocated from the end of its muscle, and then it must be kept from moving; and it is not dislocated from behind by the shoulder blade; and it is not dislocated from before by the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And most often it is dislocated and comes out at the end of the rib from behind, and in those in which the muscles are few, it is little dislocated; but in those in which the muscles are many, it comes out with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And a great noise occurs in some men by hitting or falling, and the muscle of him is drawn out from the swelling with the piercing, and it is found that he has already been dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Then wait until you are certain that he will not fall again, and then proceed with the treatment of him.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And the dislocation of him is recognized when it is at the end of the rib from behind; but so you can distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the other, for you see a great difference; and you touch the back of the muscle then, as if there were an ear, and the patient cannot reduce his hand to his ear, nor move it at all.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is dislocated then either of the legs or from behind, then you must feel a great touch, and he does not hide it.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And of this dislocation requires little reduction when it is fresh and the patient is a child.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction of him is that the minister raises his hand to his sides; and then the threads are tied behind him from the rib at the end, and raises the joint with strength to its place, and the minister raises the patient's hand, and extends it in front of him; and then the threads are tied behind him because he returns little by little.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	But if, as we have said, it does not return, and only at the beginning of the dislocation occurs, then wait a few days; but when the patient is bathed with water and oil is given to him so that he becomes soft and smooth, let him be given in brocacio, so that it softens and smoothes him like his hair cut from above; and fenugrec, and melilot in water, and administered.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	Then the patient is to lie on his back and be lifted up by the legs from behind, waiting for him to soften and tighten, and then the foot of him is placed on the spine, and the head of the muscle is raised with strength, and the hand of the patient is thrown so that it is not moved at the end of the ribs, and another minister holds the patient' s head, so that he is not moved at the ends, because it returns to its place soon.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you wish, reduce this second in this way: and it is that you be present a man who was put longer than the patient, and he was of the part of that piece, and entrometa his muscle from the titillic of the patient and lift the titillic of him to the dividers within which the patient is suspended on air, and another minister pull the patient's navel from the dividers of him of his belly.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	But if the patient is looser, then note that another cause is suspended, so that it causes that one, because the displacement returns so soon.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And it is reduced judiciously in another way: and it is that he is stuck on the ground one pole whose tip is round of figure, there cum mortar's pilo, that not be thick nor thin, and is paused from the patient; since it is paused over the tip of the pole lions' skin, and the patient is standing according to the length of the pole, and his hand is extended from him in the dividers where he is suspended, and his leg are extended from the other part because the joint returns to its place with speed.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if it is difficult reduction of him for all the causes that we have said, then use this cure: and it is that you take one pole whose quantity be in length of two bras, and his width of four fingers, and his thickness be withdrawn in the preon of the titillic according to this form:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And approach over the round tip there are skin' leons because it is not that the pole slides the patient.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And it is approached from the tip of the patient, and his hand or legs are extended over the pole within the dividers, and the pole is sloped on the assistants and the arms and the end of the hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	Then return the hand or legs over one step of steps according to the width, and the hand is extended in the dividers, and the other thing is suspended from the other part because the joint returns so soon.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the instrument of him is complete according to each way that you make possible, and then note that you pause from the tip of the muscle a quantity of wool; and it is approached plaster prepared with mortar of mill' and album of cow on all muscle, since it is turned over him, and then tighten from the tip in a constriction; and the liament is turned over the plaster, and the hand of him is connected to his neck, and is left, and not be touched the hand of him for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And since the food of the patient is few while he is comforted, because it is looser to the recovery of him.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	Then return the food is given more while there are seven or nine and be exercised a movement; and since it is stopped and not softened, then already it is healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	But if the joint is displaced movements seen by moisture that happens to him or another cause, then note that in that one is administered cautery with three strokes according to what it was said before in the chapter of cautery.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if all that remains is done and seven days are passed it is turned the liament and the joint does not close, and the plaster and constriction are reduced over him few movements, and it is not closed and becomes cut or extended or softened, and you know that the nerves of him, which are in the tip of the muscle, already they are incised or extended or softened, and you know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	From the displacement of that which is done in the feet and the breast or back dividers, the reduction is done with an impulsion and expansion to the most, while it returns.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then it is administered in that other constriction, and care in that until it is healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if it is happened near the recovery of the member and delay in the movement of him, then the patient uses with water movements seen by the gravity that happens to him or another cause, since it returns to the nature of him first.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27: Cautery
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	Of cure of displacement of the neck.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	You know that the joint of the neck is displaced with difficulty and seems to return with difficulty; and it is displaced at all dividers, especially in the front divider to the back one, and the displacement of him does not close to you because it is dislocated from the veil or touch according to some figure, and when it is adjusted the dislocated neck with the sand, then it is declared manifestly, because the joint is concave and cannot bend the arms, nor touch in it the muscle of him.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And since you are going to cauterize him and reduce the displacement with difficulty before it comes out blood, because if he sees the blood, then the reduction of him is difficult, and more so when it is in the back dividers, because it is worse than all the other causes of displacement, and of great pain, and movements seen should be made to that one the death.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And the recovery of him, when that which is possible to reduce, it is that the hand of him be extended with two hands, and his arms be expanded, and the tips of his members be over the neck and leave him, and he pushes the joint with the knuckles of his fingers together, or with the root of his hand while it returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	But if the displacement is in the front dividers, then return so that it doubles the hand with his own hand, while it strikes the neck with the root of his hand.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the displacement does not obey to the reduction, then administer violent expansion with a strong hand.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And it is that two ministers extend the arms, and they have him expansion by two ministers so that he is not disturbed with violent expansion.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	Then it is turned the arms over all part, since it is wrapped skin' rolled long on the hand of him, or liament.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the touch of the neck with his own hand, then it is unlined him with any oil so that those causes help in lubrication of the joint with ease; and it is approached the joint with a violent impulsion while it returns to its place.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	Then the reduction of him is approached since he is paused on that plaster in which there is stipticitat and excisit with album of cow, and it is turned down with a constriction, and the arm is suspended from his neck, and it is left for some days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	Then return so that it is turned off; and since the joint is formed in its place, then you turn the liament of him off and leave him.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see the joint is not strong, then you repeat the plaster and the liament, and leave him for some days while it is turned off; and return so that it is turned off.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	But if it is happened to him gravity near the reduction of the joint, and the movement of him is in a way that it can be turned off, then administer with water bath and gentle friction, and compression, while it is relieved; or pause over the joint with a cloth, since it is moved by heavy motion; and return so that it is left, and leave that one on the bone after a day or two.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	Then return that one, and put him in a bath; and when he swells, then you rub the joint with gentle friction, and return so that it is repeated over that one with a cloth, since it makes sound of motion, once, and the second, and the third, and:
corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denolam intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	The corruption has already come upon the skin between the bath and the body, which is liminal.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	Here is the translation of the provided text into English:
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter .xxviii.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	Here is a translation of the provided text:
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	Here is a translation of the provided text:
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	Here is a translation of the provided text:
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	Here is a translation of the provided text:
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	Here is a translation of the provided text:
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	Here is a translation of the provided text:
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	Here is a translation of the provided text:
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	Here is a translation of the provided text:
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter.xxix.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	Here is a translation of the provided text:
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Here is a translation of the provided text:
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	Here is a translation of the provided text:
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	Here is a translation of the provided text:
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	Here is a translation of the provided text:
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	Here is a translation of the provided text:
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	Here is a translation of the provided text:
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	Here is a translation of the provided text:
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter.xxx.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	Here is a translation of the provided text:
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	Here is a translation of the provided text:
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	Here is a translation of the provided text:
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Here is a translation of the provided text:
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	Here is a translation of the provided text:
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	Here is a translation of the provided text:
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	Here is a translation of the provided text:
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	Here is a translation of the provided text:
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	Here is a translation of the provided text:
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	Here is a translation of the provided text:
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	Here is a translation of the provided text:
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	Here is a translation of the provided text:
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	Here is a translation of the provided text:
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	Here is a translation of the provided text:
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	Here is a translation of the provided text:
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And then place the table's end over the spine, and the doctor places his feet on the other end, and he is sure that the spine is bent and has returned to its place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you want, open the one that is turned away from the hand; and it is that you remain on the ground, put the top of the patient's blanket in the back of his head, and make two pegs on the length of a forearm behind him, and put the top of the blanket on the back of his head exactly as far apart as two hands are; and the distance between each peg is one palm, and already it is made in both pegs that run through, and let each be firmly held on the ground so that it does not move.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And there is a round peg where it turns, and it is turned in both ends of the two pegs.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at the end of it is a peg where the peg is made, its length is one palm that turns away; and in the other two pegs it is similar to this.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then tighten the ties that you have stretched on the feet of the patient in the peg where his head should be, and the ties that you have stretched on the legs of the patient in the turn where his feet should be.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And then it is necessary that each turn be turned and a minister twist the turn with his hand, and the doctor crushes the spine according to what we have said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	This is how the turn is done:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And when the spine has returned to its place and the hole is closed, then apply a dry paste of honey on the skin, and then put it out; and then place over the paste the table's edge where its width is three fingers or less around it, and its length is a quantity that takes up the place of the yellow spot, and on the side of the spine.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And then tie it with the ties we have said, and use a patient of subtle nutrition inside so that it is healed.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if there is any urgency in the place at the end of the cure, then when it is necessary to administer medicines that soften and cleanse by means of a table cure for a long time, which we have recommended; and already it is administered in that place a piece of lead.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And in some cases there is an imminence of dislocation on the back of the two vertebrae, which is caused by that displacement; and it is the bone which you have already mentioned because it does not need to be done prosompce to it with this medicine, because it will greatly hurt you.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	De Cure of Hips Dislocated.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	You should know that the joint of the hip and the junction of the muscle do not need anything other than displacement, and that is what happens in those parts where there is little movement and concavity.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the hip joint is displaced in four ways, because it is displaced at the front, or at the back, or on the left, or on the right.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And mostly it is displaced at the back, and less at the front or behind.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	And the sign of the hip's displacement at the back is that when you adjust the patient' blanket to his body, it becomes longer and narrower, and the patient can not bend his neck, and this is the place where the tongue comes here.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	And the sign of that which you experience is displacement at the front, it is that the accidents of him are opposite to this accident.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	And the sign of that which you experience is displacement at the back, because it spreads his blanket according to the form, but it does not bend that part that hurts him, and if he walks, he will not be able to go forward; and his urine is retained and his skin is inflamed, and his walking must be over the ground.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	And the sign of that which you experience is displacement at the back, because it does not spread his neck, and he cannot bend that part in front of him that bends his skin, and his blanket becomes narrower than the other, and his skin is softened, and the top of the patient' blanket is the place.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	But the reduction of these spices of this displacement is that you consider, then, if the displacement is old and ancient, which has already been old to him, you administer a reduction to him and it is according to its disposition, then it does not need to be done prosompce; but if it is in that form, then it is necessary to do so.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	But in that which the displacement is recent, and it is one of the four spices of displacement, then you return to the joint and extend it at the front and back, and turn it on the left and right, because it will return strongly and does not need other treatment.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	But if it does not return in this way, then you prepare a strong minister and extend the blanket of him from the back, or under his body, or with ties that are tied over his neck; and another minister extends the hand of him on the side that comes above his toes, holding its ends to the other side; and you tighten the ties over the spine, and have another minister hold it between his hands.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And it is an extension of him from the front to the neck, or from the back to the hip.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And it is the extension of all these in one case within which the patient is lifted up by his neck to the ground, and his legs hang down.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	This type of extension is specific to all four.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And therefore, if the displacement returns to the place that we have mentioned, it is necessary, and otherwise, then it is necessary for all specific purposes of the patient' cure.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of him himself, when he is displaced, and the displacement is at the back, then the patient is lifted up on his side; and then place the ties over the spine at the front of the patient' blanket in that place where the head is, and then extend the ties from the back to the neck.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And then another minister takes the arms of him, and tightens the place where the blanket is thick on the patient' side, and extends it to the back by violent extension, because that returns to its place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	This type of treatment is the lightest for this member, with which it is reduced as compared to the other specific treatments.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	But if you are not willing to follow this treatment for this type of cure, then you tie the two ends of the blanket together with strong ties, and place them on both sides of the patient' feet, and under his legs.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And it is the length of each of them in relation to four fingers, and the blanket is extended more than the other by two fingers.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And then the blanket is suspended from the top of the pole, and it is in the middle; and the length of him is two arms away from the ground.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And then you order a strong young man to cut the top of the blanket, and another young man hangs it on the pole, and the other young man cuts the blanket with a sharp knife, because the joint returns quickly to its place.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	But in the reduction of him himself, when the displacement is at the back, then he keeps the blanket as it is described above, and it is tightened on his neck specifically, and over his legs.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And two staves should be placed, one at the feet and the other at the head; and these two staves should be adjusted to the middle of the patient lying on his back, wrapped in blankets so that the bed doesn't get wet by the sweat of the patient, for so the staves don't get between the thighs of the patient, so that the extension to the legs that are not extended doesn't get pulled.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	Then each servant should extend their part, and the doctor with his hand shall receive the reduction according to the art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Then, if you obey in reverse, sir will be greatly injured; and otherwise, pause for a moment over that carefully and then so that the swelling is relieved by that engagement.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	May cover that the patient lies on his side comfortably.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is in front, then cover that the chest is slightly extended, and this according to this narrative about the body; and the doctor places his right hand on the patient's side, and the other hand he raises above the patient's back, and with that hand he places the extension that has been placed in front at the patient's back.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	And if the dislocation is in the back, then don't cover that the patient lies on his side, and he is lifted up from the ground; while, for a moment, cover that it is placed on a hard surface, so that, if the bed of the patient has been displaced in front, according to what we have said about the extension of the bed of the patient between two broad pieces; and it is on its face, and the joints are extended, as we have said, there is no turning back.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And cover that a compression is applied to the joint with a wooden board.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Then, with the reduction completed as you see it— and that the doctor doesn''t turn his head towards you, and is because you extend two legs of the patient, and when you notice those joints and the patient's leg extends its knee, then you know that the second member has been returned— and then you place two cushions and pause a towel under them, so that the bed doesn''t get wet by the sweat of the patient; and then the patient lies in repose for three days or four.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	Then return the joint and the towel, and compare one leg to the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	Then, if you see those joints in your face, then you know that the dislocation has already been stopped, and let the patient walk.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	Then, if you see any cause of softening, then you return and apply it to the first, and extend the second according to your first extension, and let it rest for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	Then remove that one, and let that one walk a little every day until it is comfortable.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter LII.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	Of the Treatment of a Dislocated Shoulder.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The shoulder is displaced in three ways, because it is displaced in front, and at the back, and to the sides more towards the front; and it isn't displaced in front.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of a dislocated shoulder is that you command the patient to extend his chest to the cushion; then you know that the shoulder is displaced.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of all types of shoulders is that you place the patient on his right side, then extend his chest, and if he can stand over it; support his legs with your hands, and place the patient' neck between his legs; and then, using strength, place the shoulder under your hand, and another servant extends its leg until the shoulder returns to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And the sign of recovery is that his chest touches the cushion lightly.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Then cover that one and attach it to the cushion, and then place those for three days or four, and then remove them.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And don' t use the patient for walking for a few days, until he is healed and comfortable.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	May also, if the reduction to you is not sufficient, administer a strong compression to the joints in the treatment of the shoulder as a previous narrative has preceded.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter LIII.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	Of the Treatment of a Dislocated Hip.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The hip sometimes is reset by a small movement, and sometimes it is displaced by the complete extension, and the displacement of the hip is made either in front or at the back.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the sign of a displaced hip is that it rises towards the leg that has been displaced.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	May also, the treatment of resetting the hip is a slight extension, and it is extended with ease to the leg, and is placed within that returns.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	May also, in the treatment of the hip when it is displaced by complete extension, cover that you make a cross with your two hands behind the patient' hips, and place the patient' legs on either side of yours.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	Then stand on your right side towards the patient' head, and on your left side towards the patient' feet in the position of the crown.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	Then throw the feet on either side towards you, and then extend them towards your left, and place the feet of the patient with your right hand, and let the bed work.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	Do this twice as we have counted it.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	Then place the feet on the third time, and you are at the crown.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	Then, if you return the feet once or twice in this way, and if they get stuck, then repeat the operation because those feet return.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	May also, if you are forbidden to reduce the patient on a bed as we have mentioned, then make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and place a mat between his thighs, and let him walk until he is comfortable; and cover that he doesn' t come out because of the mat.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	Then the servants of the patient hold their legs, and another servant extends his foot to the side towards your leg, or against your knee; and another minister extends the foot of the patient towards your leg, or between your knees, so that the patient' heel doesn' t get caught in front of you by the mat.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	Then the doctor receives the displacement in his mouth, and another minister holds the patient' leg at the back, because the displacement returns easily.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And then, when the displacement has been returned to you, and you see that the reduction is good, then cover with a towel and place it on the patient' chest; and tie up the feet to the bed.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	Then, if you fear or are careful of the nerves that lie behind the hip, so that the joint does not move suddenly and strongly.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	Then leave it alone for two or three days; and if the joint is softened, remove it.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	Then remove that one after three or four days, and don' t let the patient walk for ten days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	May also, if it is difficult to walk after that space, don' t be sure that the displacement has not been broken and corrupted, and then do not receive treatment.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if it happens to him that he is parched by a caustic, then cover that you administer in the treatment of him as we have preceded in our narrative, in another place of treatment and of emulsion, until he is reset.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter .xxxiiii.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	On the Treatment of Dislocations of the Foot.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	Caution in Relocating a Dislocated Foot: This work will address the treatment of a dislocated foot with careful movement and a gradual approach to relocate it; it is not a difficult process, but it must be done carefully.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	If the dislocation is in the toes of the feet, then you must carefully move the patient's foot off the ground or table, and support it as if they were walking.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	And then place the foot you are working on on top of something that supports it off the ground or table, and carefully move it back into position little by little until it is in its correct place, and make sure it does not slip; this will help keep it in place.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	And then place a table that supports the entire foot on top of it, with two ends supporting the heel and toe, and make sure it is firm and secure for three days; and then, after those three days, let them rest from walking for another five days to ensure it heals properly and does not move.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter .xxxv.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	On the Types of Dislocations: From Plaague, Fracture, or Any Joint Dislocation.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When any of these causes occur, and you are involved in the treatment of that person and their recovery, be aware that death may result.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And regarding the treatment of the patient, do not be proud, long-winded, impatient, or arrogant; use only a small amount of medicine to soothe it slightly, and leave the patient in God's hands for judgment, but if you have any hope of salvation from harm, offer some relief from pain, and there is some hope.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And then strive to relocate it as soon as possible at the start of the cause, before any blisters form.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And then, if the limb returns quickly, administer medicine that soothes it slightly and treats the plague with the water of enchancments.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if the dislocation is a fracture and the bones are separated, then you must carefully re-align them, and make sure that what has been said before in simple words regarding plagues also applies to this.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And beware and avoid, according to your virtue, the instrument in fear as my predication has preceded you; for it is better that you should seek your Lord, and remain steadfast in your glory, and greet your true Lord with those who are most worthy of it at the right time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Thus ends the words of Al-Bucasımi, explaining in detail what God has willed.
Amen.	Amen.
