Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Thus begin the words of Albucasim.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	O sons, since I have completed this book for you, which is the last of the science of medicine, through its fulfillment in me, and through its expositions and declarations, it has become clear to me that you will understand this treatise, which is a part of the operation with the hand, i.e., surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	For the operation of the hand is nearly unknown in our realm and time, having been deprived of it almost entirely, while those who know something about it have distorted its science, and its procedures are obscured; only a few small descriptions of it remain in the books of the Ancients, which confuse the matter and lead to error and uncertainty, so that the understanding of it is blocked and its force and art diminished.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And it has seemed good to me that I should animate this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and so that it might come with the forms of the tools of cautery and other instruments of the work as they are through the addition of the declaration, and for its preparation, which is necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	But the reason why no one is adept with their hand in our time is because the art of medicine is long, and its practitioner must be exercised in the science of anatomy, which knows the parts of the members and their forms, and the conjunction and separation of them; and has knowledge of the bones, the nerves, and the tendons, and the number of them, and their movement; and of the pulsating veins and the quiet ones, and their places of emission.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And so Hypocrites says that though his name is small, in the work he is great, and especially in the art of the hand.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	But we have already said this in the introduction to this book; for whoever is not learned in what we have said about anatomy, it has been made clear that he should not fall into error, by which men will die, as I have seen many of them, for some are formed in this science and yet stray from it without experience.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	For I saw an experienced fool of a doctor pierce a scrophula on a woman's neck, and pierce some arteries in the neck so that much blood flowed and the woman died under his hand.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And I saw another doctor who pulled out a stone from a man who was in great pain, and the stone was large; he came to him and extracted that stone with a fragment of the bladder, so that the man died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And I called for them to stop extracting it, and saw that due to the size of the stone and the condition of the patient, I knew that he would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And I saw another doctor who received a stipend from a duke of our land for surgery, and he treated a black slave who had a fracture in his thigh; and preparing with his ignorance, he extracted the fracture over the plague with powders and splints with strong compression, and did not let the plague breathe.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And he healed according to his desires, and he bound it, and let it be for several days, and commanded that I should not loosen the bandage; and so it stayed as it was, and the thigh and the leg became pustular, and it came to ruin.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And I was called to him, and I prepared to loosen the bandage; and after there was tranquility and he was eased of his pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	But indeed corruption was confirmed in the member, so that I could not restrain it, and the corruption wandered in the member until the patient perished.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And I saw another doctor who perforated a cancerous ulcer, and it festered for some days, until the wickedness of it increased with its lord.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The reason for this is that the black humor is pure in its melancholy, therefore it does not come to it with fire at all, but rather that it is in a member which suffers from everything that is hostile to it.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And so, sons, it is necessary for you that the operation of the hand should be understood in two ways: one is operation which is associated with health, and the other is work with which the greatest dispositions are endangered.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And I have already exhorted this in every place of this book where there is error and fear; so it is necessary for you to guard against this and leave that, so that fools do not hinder the way of speaking and disgracing you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And therefore take up your weapons with zeal and with the protection of God, and your diseases with facility and with firmness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the better way by the grace of God so that health and laudable success may result, and put aside terrible diseases of difficult cure, and wield your weapons against what makes you fearful, so that idleness in your faith and in your name does not leave you: for it remains to your glory, and more in the world and beyond to your sanctities.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Gaulias already said in some of his maxims:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	"Do not treat ill diseases ill, so that bad doctors are not named."
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And I have composed this book according to three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Begins the division of the book, and first of the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter ordered on the head, in the forms of the instruments and the tools of cauteries, and of what is necessary in operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter, of bleeding and piercing, and of cupping, and of plasters, and of extraction of thorns and like things, all chaptered and ordered in the forms of the instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	Division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, of restoration and of dislocation, and of cure of torque and like things; a chapter ordered on the head, in the forms of the instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	Of cautery with fire and sharp medicine, and remembrance of operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	With that begins the treatise of all the book.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	I shall say what the quality is of the ingredients of that cautery and of the things in it, and in what condition cautery is prohibited.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore I say that the speech of the quality of the ingredient of cautery and of the thing in it is long and prolix, and subtle by science, and secret hidden; and much has been spoken about it by many wise men, and from it they have disagreed, and for me a little of their speeches is enough, fearing prolixity.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And therefore I say that cautery confers universally on all complections, save two complektions which are caustic complektions without material.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the caustic and dry complection with material they disagreed; for some said that cautery is beneficial for it, and others said the contrary of that, that cautery is not convenient in disease which is by quality and dryness, for the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and what is convenient is that disease caustic and dry be healed with what is cauted and dry.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And he said the contrary of that, that by cautery is made remedy in all disease caustic and dry which is seen in the bodies of men, for when you compare the body of man and its humidities to the complection of fire, you rub the body of man.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I say by the speech of that, that experiment that has been discovered to me several times.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	But it is not necessary to come upon this anyone who has already been demonstrated and exercised in the chapter of cauterization by former exercise, and has known the diversity of the complexions of men and the disposition of diseases in them, and their causes, and their accidents, and the space of time of them.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	But in the other complexions there is no need for fear, especially in damp and moist diseases, for all doctors have agreed on these, and they do not disagree about using cauterization to treat them.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And understand, sons, that the secret of curing by cauterization with fire and its goodness is that it is a simple substance whose action does not extend to the members joined to the one cauterized, and it does not affect any other member except with a slight injury.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	But the action of burning medicine extends to other members, and it strongly brings about a difficult-to-cure disease in them, and strongly weakens them.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	But fire, by its subtlety and the goodness of its substance, does not do that except to cause it to superfluous. And we have known through experience and through long service in studying the truth of causes, and so I am excused from the length of speech. And if it were not for my not being free to read this hidden secret to you with fire, and the quality of its operation on bodies and its expulsion through which you expel diseases, by philosophical speech demonstrated, which would be acute in your ears.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And understand, sons, that they disagree on the time when it is convenient to do cauterization, and they pause at the best time in spring.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And I say that cauterization is convenient at all times, as long as the harm caused by the accidental time is submerged in the benefit of what is drawn by cauterization, and especially if the cauterization is for pain or necessary pains, strong and violent, which do not tolerate delay for fear of evil, which is greater than slight harm coming through the weather.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And know this, or, sons, that which is not believed except by the common people and foolish doctors, it is that to that disease which is healed by cauterization there is no reduction at all time, and they pause at the consequent one.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the cause is not as they think through that, for cauterization is only in place of medicine which alters the complexion and dries up the moistnesses which are the cause of the pains coming.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	But cauterization surpasses medicine through willingness in its strength and virtue of its operation, and the greatness of its lord.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	And it is possible that his disease will return at some time of the year, according to the complexion of the patient and the location of the disease, and its strength, and what has been prepared in his body through the gathering of superfluities in him, and what he has received from him in food and likeness from those causes; but that disease for which cauterization is administered is a subtle disease in members with few superfluities and moistnesses, thus as cauterization for toothache and its like to it, it is possible that this pain will not return in him, but what happens in small amounts.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	And the common speech is that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine, and it is a true speech, not that they understand in it, for they believe that there is no cure that benefits from medicine or anything else except cauterization.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the cause is contrary to that; and the intention that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine is only when we administer the methods of curing in certain diseases, and those medicines do not confer it, and then at the end of the cause, we administer hom cautery, and it benefits from that.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And from here we see that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine, not according to the intention which the common people and foolish doctors understand.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And they say that cauterization with gold is better than cauterization with iron, and they do not say this except for the equality of gold and subtlety of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they say that the place of cauterization does not matter, even though it is absolutely true, for I have seen and proven that it only happens in some bodies without the others, and cauterization with it is good and better than with iron as they say; but when you do cauterization with fire with gold, it is not declared to you, for it is heated according to the quantity that you want through the roughness of the gold, and prepares to receive heat; and if you put on fire some leaves so that the craftsman sees through the occupation of that.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And for this, cauterization with iron is done to us more lightly and closer to the correctness of operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have arranged this chapter on cauterization according to chapters, and have arranged those of the head among the feet, so that they may ask him for what they want from him.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	Of cauterization of headache pain due to coldness and moistness.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cauterization confers with moistness and coldness the superficial accident of which it has two causes, it is caused by soda and multitude of fluxes, called corissa, from the parts of the ears and nostrils flowing, and multitude of sleep, and toothache and of the gullet, and universally of all disease that comes through coldness, thus with paralysis, stroke, and its like in those diseases.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cauterization is as follows: first of all, order the patient to be evacuated by laxative medicine three or four times, depending on the strength of the patient and his age and habit.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then command that he washes his head with water, and then let him sit between your knees on a low bench, and place his hands over his feet.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then pause the edge of your palm close to the tip of the nose between your eyebrows.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if after three days it has not arrived, mark that location with ink, and then light the cauterization olive, of which this is the form:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And then place it over the location marked by ink, in such a way that it descends, and your hand be forced little by little, and you turn it.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And then lift your hand lightly and look at the location, and if you see some amount of the head, thus as the amount of grains of sand, then lift your hand again, and if it does not return to your hand with that iron, with another one, if it is cold, between what has been seen by you that I have said to you.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then take a little salt and dissolve it over the location and leave it for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then place on it wet cotton in vinegar and let it sit there until the fire ash is destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And then heal the location with tetraceutical ointment once it has healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And they say that when the Roman plaster is open, as many miles are added to the distance, for it is better and more beneficial.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And some of them say that the head be cauterized within the eye socket and have the cauterization within the eye socket as it is attached to some part of the brain.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And then it is cut that which is attached to the bone, and then it is healed.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	Others say that with the cautery they come to the end, while they press on the strong bone as they enter it, and this is the form of small Alfecat.
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And they consider that from that location they expel the vapor from the head.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And if the wound is open for a long time, it should be treated until it is healed and consolidated.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	But I have not seen these two types of cautery at all, except in some men according to the way of fear; and leaving that aside, for me it is better for health when there is no pain, since the head is relieved through solution of continuity as we have testified in other members, and especially when the nature of the patient's head is of a phlegmatic nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the first type of cautery is safer and better for me, and it is used and works with health.
Capitol segon.	Chapter second.
Del cauteri del cap.	Of cautery of the head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When in all the head there occurs chronic and long-lasting pain and this is prolonged in the patient, using serots and clysters and head-purges and plasters and poultices and bandages and herbs and similar things, and especially if it has already been cauterized with a cautery which we count and does not benefit him from any of those causes, then consider that if the nature of the patient's head is of a strong creation in its nature; and it is phlegmatic and finds great heat in it, then cauterize it with another cautery after that one.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	Then cauterize it on the crown of his head with a cautery so that the vein is cut.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	The vein is cut and the quantity which we have counted is revealed and cauterized with a cautery in the back of the head in the place which is called the vessel — and it is that place where a leech is applied.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And you put your hand on it, and do not reveal the bone, for the patient will find much greater pain from that than from all the other cauteries of the head.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And I say this cautery in its place, for the cautery with which you cautarize the horns of the head and the occiput is more subtle cautery than that with which the middle part of the head is cauterized; and this is how it is done.
Capitol ters.	Chapter third.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	Of cautery of recent and not antique emigration.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When in the front of the head there is painful swelling, or pain extends to the eye, the head should be evacuated with cleansing medicines, and other treatment should be administered, which I have described in the chapters on diseases; and if all does not help, cautery in it is in two ways: either cautery with an acute burning medicine, or with a hot iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	But cautery with a burning medicine is that you take a piece of wool and char it, and scrape away its edges and bind the ends of it on both sides of the head.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	Then cut the place of pain in the temple with a pointed lance so that it is made under the vein and hidden.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	Then tighten it with a tight bandage, leaving that aside for the space of three hours; then loosen it and treat the ash, leaving the wound for two or three days, and then put cold water on it until the place becomes swollen.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then heal it with ointment as it heals.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you wish, do this with some burning medicines which I have written in the two treaties of burning medicines.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	But the cautery with an iron is done according to this way: heat for cautery, of which this is the form:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	and it is called a closed key, for the head of it is thus shaped like a key in which there is some curvature, and in the middle place of it there is a small eminence.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	Then pause over the place of pain, and hold your hand — so that it is not burnt by the iron which is below — and move the hot iron little by little with speed.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the quantity of it that is burnt by the heat of the vein thus according to its nature and size, and raise your hand so that the artery below is not burnt, so that there comes no flow of blood.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then soak a bandage in salt water and pause it over the place, leaving that for three days; then pause the bandage moistened with wine, and heal with ointment as it heals.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you wish, cauterize with the end of the scalpel according to cautery, and beware of incision of artery in this recent and not antique emigration.
Capitol quart.	Chapter fourth.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	Of cautery of ancient emigration.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you treat emigration with what we have said of the preceding treatment, and what we have said in the chapters on diseases, and the treatment does not help, and you see that the disease is not satisfied by it according to what we have said of the first cautery with medicine or of cautery with fire, then when you ignite the cautery-scalpel so that it is whitened, push it onto the place of pain with a line of length according to its size, or as much as that; and raise your hand by a pathway and tighten it so that you cut the artery and it comes into the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However it is necessary for you to beware of the continuation of the mandible which is gnawed by chewing, and that the ligament not be burnt and the nerve which gnaws that, and that no spasms come.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it is upon the custody and caution of flow of blood from the artery which is cut, for in the cutting of it there is danger, and especially to him who ignores what he does and is not experienced and educated; leave the operation at the beginning.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And I will come with remembrance of the rule of flow of blood from the artery according to his own way, in his own place of this free book.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see of this disease that it does not help that cautery and you see the body of the patient tolerable, cauterize him in the middle place of the head as we have counted, and heal the wound as it heals.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you wish, administer the cautery which we have said in the chapter on stretching of artery with cautery having two edges, and this cautery is better and more potent.
Capitol .v.	Chapter fifth.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	Of cautery for pains of ears.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When in the ear there is pain from heat and it is treated with lytic causes and with other treatment which I have said in the division, and the pain is not relieved, then ignite the cautery and this is called puncta, of which this is the form:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	Then push the point of ignition and it is carried into the whole ear as it is turned, or in the circuit of whichever part if the pain is in whichever part.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Take it away with the cautery of the edge of the ear a little by little as you test the place with touch.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the cautery of ten points in all the ears, and whichever part, then heal the places as they are healed.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter sixth.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	Of cautery for tetter.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	Tetter which is healed and cautery of it is not but of the spices which come through phlegm, according to what we have said in the chapters on diseases.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Beware of cautery of the species that comes through drying or through spasm of the nerve.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you treat this type of torture with chains and whipings and threats, and your cure does not work, then you should cauterize the patient with three cauteries: you must apply the first one at the root of the ear, the second one below his temple, and the third one at the junction of two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And apply your cautery on the opposite side of the affected area, because softening only occurs in the part that appears healthy.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	And the way to perform cauterization is to cauterize the patient on the right side of the upper part of the ear, a little above the horn of the head, and another one on the temple, the length of which should be according to the length of the finger toe, and place your hand with the cautery until half of the amount of the thickness of the skin is burned.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the form of cauterization, and it is the specialty of the surgeon, the shape of his tool being like a table.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	But in fact, it is more subtle: when you see that there is too much thickness, you should cut a little bit into the patient.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	Then treat the wound with what is called the direct process until it heals.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter 7.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	On cauterization for old apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is old and you treat it with what we have said and your medicine does not work, and the patient does not have fever, then cauterize him with four cauteries: on both horns of his head, as we have said; and with a cautery in the middle part of the head, as we have said; and with a cautery in the neck.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the manner of cauterization is done according to what has been said above.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And it is cauterized on the mouth of the stomach; and it is more behind; and it should be treated with what has already been said.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 8.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	On cauterization for oblivion caused by phlegm.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	Give the patient at the beginning large whips and purifying pills.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	Then scrape the whole head of the patient and place on his neck a plaster made from cedar resin, as described in the treatise on plasters.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And apply this several times, because this is the way to cauterize.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And do that according to the order of medicines which we have already said.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And if he gets better with that, good; and if not, then do to him three cauteries on the back part of his head, which descend from the upper part of the head to the lower part of the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And place between each cautery the thickness of a finger, and treat the cauteries with what has been said.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	But if you think that he can bear it and the patient can tolerate it, then do to him a cautery in the middle part; and if you see greater tolerance, then cauterize him on both horns.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Then treat that until it is healed; and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to the form given above.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter 9.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	On cauterization for paraplegia and on softening all the body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	Give the patient whips and purifying pills in the head as we have said; then scrape his head and cauterize it with a cautery in the middle part of the head, and with a cautery on both horns of the head, and with a cautery on the back part of him, and with three cauteries on the vertebrae of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the softening of the body and the patient can tolerate it, and the disease is strong, then cauterize him with four cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and lastly with a cautery until half of the thickness of the skin is burned, and raise your hand.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	Then treat that until it is healed, and let this be an olive-shaped cautery.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	On cauterization for epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	The epileptic is not cauterized unless the epilepsy is due to phlegm.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And so give the brain of him at the beginning whips and the other treatment which we have said in the division when the patient is large and can tolerate the exception of medicines.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if the patient is a child who does not suffer from medicines, then administer healing and masticables, before which for several days there should be benefit from food.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	Then scrape the head of the patient, and cauterize him with a cautery in the middle part of the head according to the previous manner, and with another cautery on his occipital bone, and on each horn of his head.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is strong and can tolerate it, then cauterize him with cauteries as we have said, having paralysis and softening of the body on the vertebrae of the neck and the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And let the cautery be olive-shaped according to what has been said before.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	But if the patient is a child, then apply a subtle cautery according to this manner.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	On cauterization for melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humors and phlegm, then cauterize him with cauteries as we have said in having paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is excessive decline into melancholy, and the body of the patient is humid, then give him what purifies his brain according to what has preceded in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	Then scrape the head of the patient, and properly make a torch made of lye over the circle, and then place it in the middle part of the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And let the patient be for sixty days, and let him be held from every side.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	Then give him a lining; and it is more worthy to make an old sheep’s udder.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And warm that over the fire with moderate heat according to measure, as long as he can tolerate it when it is on him.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	Then place that in the middle part of his head over the circle, and rub it until it is warm.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And do that with the patient once a week for a month, and let him have his other regime as long as he is better; or if you want, cauterize him making small points according to his age, unless you hold your hand with a cautery in this way: this is a special cautery which moistens the brain equally.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	Then give that cut in a bag made of wool or in a towel of flannel.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter 12.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	On cauterization for water descending into the navel.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When you see the beginning of water in the navel because of phlegm as we have said in the division, then begin and give the patient what purifies his head, and guard him from all humors.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And make that sweat in a bath made of vinegar for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	Then command that he wash his head, and cauterize him with a cautery in the middle part of the head; and then cauterize him with two cauteries on two temples if the beginning is of water in two navels, or on one side if it is the beginning of water in one navel.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Penetrate with a cautery all the veins and arteries which are under the skin; and let the cauteries be long in that length of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	Guard against flows of blood when it is cauterized; and if you see flows of blood from him, stop them with some medicine which is possible for you.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	I bring wisdom, which comes from the extraction of arrows and from the cauterization of these wounds and the flow of blood.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And sometimes it is cauterized in the head, under the bones, with two cauteries made recently.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter 13.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	On the cauterization of old tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When tears from the holes are old and persistent, and flow through veins and arteries in the head, causing a surplus of phlegmatic moisture, then cauterize it with the cautery we described in the chapter on the beginning of water gushing from the holes; apply the cautery in the middle part of the head, and use two cauteries on the neck below the temples, and two cauteries on the neck under the bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if there is a need for more cauterization, then cauterize it all over the root of the hole on the upper lip with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter 14.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	On the cauterization for the odor of the nose.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you treat a patient with what we have said in the division and your treatment does not work, then prepare and give the patient enemas for three nights; then shave his head, and cauterize the midline of the head with an olive-oil cautery.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	Then cauterize the nose with a small cautery at two cauteries above the upper lip under the hair.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And be careful not to burn the artery.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	This is the form of the nail cautery.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	On the cautery for softening the eyelids of the holes.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the hole is softened due to illness or humidity, then cauterize that eyelid with one cautery using this lunar cautery; and this is its form:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you are cauterizing it above the two eyebrows, do so with two small cauteries on each side, and have them extended from the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And let the length of each cautery be according to the size of the eyebrow.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press your hand too hard with the cautery, but according to how much the third part of the eyelid is adhere.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter 16.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	On the cautery for the eyelid of the hole when the hairs are converted to the inside parts and poke the hole.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the hairs of the hole are converted inward so that they poke the hole, there are two ways to cauterize them: either by cautery or by burning medicine.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If you cauterize it with fire, command the patient to pull his hairs so that they are straightened out, and while they are prolonged and curly; and if he pokes that, then you strengthen the hole with a bandage so that it does not get worse until the hairs grow back.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Then when they grow back and become curly, then place the patient's head in your lap, and carefully mark the eyelid of the hole with a tent, using a mark that is according to the shape of a dead leaf; and let the beginning of the mark be near the hairs.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	Then place a damp cloth in white vinegar or in mullein tea on the hole.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And then light the cautery, of which this is the form:
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And then cauterize over the marked area, little by little, in small spots, until the surface of the skin appears like a myrrh leaf, all appearing properly.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	And the sign of your work's health is that you see the eyelid of the hole already contracted and the hairs of it elevated from the puncture of the hole.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And then raise your hand and lay him down for three days, and then place a bandage on him so that the scar is healed.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	But if the hairs return for any reason and the eyelid is softened, then do the cautery on it again all over as you did at first.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	But if the hairs are in the eyelid, then cauterize that so that it is elevated to its natural place and is curly, and the hairs do not poke the hole.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	But the cautery with burning medicine is that you command the patient to pull his hairs so that they are prolonged and curly, and then let the mark be made of linen in the shape of a myrrh leaf.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. .i., o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And then take gum mastic and live coals, one ounce. Chapter 17. Take that mixture and spread it on the cloth that was made in the shape of a myrrh leaf, and place it over the hole or both holes; then place the patient' head in your lap.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And hold his finger over the medicine and press it gently so that the patient feels the biting of the medicine, for the biting is in him as if with fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And when you perceive that the biting has ceased, then remove the medicine and wash the hole with water; then consider if you see the eyelid already elevated as it is washed after the constriction by fire or incision, for then it is well; and if it returns to the medicine over the place where the medicine did not stick, and do not darken until your operation is healed and the hole contracted.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And then place a bandage on him so that the scar of the constriction is eradicated, and then treat it with an ointment of diascordium or another until it is healed.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary for you, after your operation, that you guard against the falling of the medicine into the hole; and if the eyelid, after several days, becomes softened and for some reason the hairs poke the hole, then repeat your medicine on that place of the eyelid which is softened, and especially as you did at the beginning, and bandage it until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is the shape of myrrh leaf.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And know that men' holes are diverse according to their size and smallness, and therefore according to that is your constriction made.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And do not become experienced in this way to him who has studied this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter 17.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	On the cauterization of a fistula that is in the tear duct of the hole.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you treat a fistula with what we have said in the divisions of illnesses and your treatment does not succeed, then know that you cauterize it as follows: command the patient to hold his head in your lap, and let some attendant hold his head so that it is not moved nor shaken by his head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And then place a damp cloth in white vinegar or in mullein tea on the hole of him.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then light the cautery, of which this is its form:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	Which is hollow, as it is shaped like a reed or a pen, from one end there is made the cautery.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you see that it penetrates to the other end.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you want it to come out as a tent.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	But what is hollow is better for your work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And then press the fistula if it is open, and draw out from it pus and dry that.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	If it is not open, then open it and extract the hernia.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	Then place the cautery, which should be well ignited, over him, and hold your hand a little away from the cautery near the start of the nose so that your hand does not get burned or the patient become disturbed, and then apply the cautery to the openings of the hernia and corrupt that.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And so if at the beginning of your cautery it enters into the bone, that is good; and if not, then repeat the cautery once or twice, if necessary; and leave it like this for three days, and then place a poultice on that spot and surround it with a dry bandage until it is healed.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	But if eleven days have passed and it has not healed, then apply an acrid corrosive medicine to the bone so that it is exposed and scrape it according to what is appropriate in its chapter.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And there is another way of cauterizing a fistula which some at first said: enter the place of the fistula and open it up and then in that fissure pour in subtle cement of which its shape is made; And melt into that the quantity of one ounce of molten lead; and hold your hand with good retention so that the patient is not burned because the molten lead does not reach the hernia of that; and cover what you place over the hernia of the patient with linen or water, for the lead clogs the place of the fistula and heals it in a marvelous way.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about the cautery and treatment, that is good; and if not, then it is necessary to administer snuff of the nose and reduce the fistula into the body of the nose according to what will come in its proper place.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter .xviii.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	Of cautery for the fissure of the anus.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Many times fissures occur in the lips, and mostly in the lips of children.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	So then when you treat those fissures with what we have said in the divisions and your treatment does not prove effective, then ignite the cautery with a small knife according to this shape that is described:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And its cavity should be according to the subtlety of the blade.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Then place that gently in those fissures so that the cautery reaches the depth of the fissures.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that with ointment until it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter .xix.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	Of cautery for a fistula in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When in the root of the uvula or in the palate or in the roots of the teeth there is swelling and it then ruptures, and it becomes old, and the swelling becomes corroded and a fistula is made, and you treat that and your treatment does not prove effective, then when you ignite the cautery according to the quantity that is received in the fistula, then place that ignited iron into the hole of the fistula, and hold your hand so that the hot iron reaches the depth of it, and at the end of it do this once or twice; and then treat that with what we have said about treatment until it is healed.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And so if the pus is discharged and it is healed, that is good; and if not, then it is necessary to expose the place and scrape away the corrupted bone according to what will come in its chapter.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter .xx.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	Of cautery for teeth and of softening of the gums.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth are burned, and you treat those with medicines and they do not help, then place the head of the patient in your lap, and ignite the cautery the form of which will come next here, so that you place the quanula over the tooth and insert into it the ignited cautery quickly, and hold your hand a little away so that the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	And then lift up your hand, and repeat the cautery several times according to what you want.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	And then the patient should hold his mouth open with salt water for an hour, and then spit it out, for the burned tooth is solidified and the softened gum is strengthened and the corrupted moisture is dried up.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter .xxi.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	Of cautery for toothache.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When toothache is by coldness, or in it is frostbitten or rotten, or does not respond to treatment with medicine, then cautery in that is according to two ways: either cautery with a cow's horn, or cautery with fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Cautery with a horn is that you take a cow's horn and melt it in the embers of fire, and then take it with tongs and wrap it around the end of the tooth, and then dip that into the melted horn, and place that over the painful tooth quickly so that it is frostbitten.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And then repeat that several times so that the virtue of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you wish, dip wool or cotton in the horn, and place that over the painful tooth, and place ignited iron over it so that the iron reaches the cavity of the tooth.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	However, cautery with fire is that you wait for the iron or needle to be red-hot, and there should be some thickness in it and the acuity of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	And then ignite the cautery the form of which will come, and place that over the tooth and hold your hand so that the cautery is frostbitten; and do this several times because the pain will return again or on that day or the next day.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And if through the pressure of that cautery the patient fills his mouth with good saliva and holds it for an hour and then spits it out, this is the form of the cautery.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And cauterize however you wish according to what is possible for you.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the form of the needle:
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter .xxii.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	Of cautery for hernias.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When hernias are of phlegm and cold humors and do not respond to digestion with medicines and you see the digestion of those slightly, then ignite the cautery in such a way that the smoke of the cautery passes through both ends, and place that ignited over the hernia once, and if they do not respond to that, then repeat it so that it reaches the depth of the hernia.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the hernia is small, then place the cautery according to the quantity of the hernia, and let it rest for three days, and place over it poultice dipped in ointment so that what the fire has burned is softened.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that with ointment and bandages until it is healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And the form of the needle or iron for cautery is thus described.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter .xxiii.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	Of cautery for earache and constriction of the throat.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When moisture comes upon the hollow of the lung, and especially when it is with coldness of complexions, then let the patient be evacuated at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize that after the root of the gullet in the place which is swollen.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And take care that you do not reach with the cautery to the gullet or burn the cords of it, but a little.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And cauterize that with another cautery after the joint of the throat in its last vertebra.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	And let the cautery for him be a heated needle according to the previous manner.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	Then cure that with what has been mentioned before, until it is healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter 24.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	Of cautery for lung diseases and coughs.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When cough and lung disease are caused by dampness infiltrating the body, and the patient doesn't have a fever or consumption, and the disease is old, then cauterize that with two cauteries over the furcula in the places just below the collarbones and between the nipples; and with another cautery in the middle of the chest between the breasts; and let the cauteries be heated according to the previous method.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, let your cautery be pointed with the cautery that is called "punta", the form of which is described in the puncturing of ear pain.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And let there be points within those; and then cure that with what has been mentioned before, until it is healed.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And now let the cautery have three points; for this cautery you can do three cauteries according to this method:
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	Of cautery for the tickling in the throat.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the throat is dislocated due to damp and slippery humors, and it does not return to its proper position in the time of its recovery, and instead is displaced by a slight movement as we have witnessed, then first reduce the dislocation, and let the patient be reversed onto his back or onto his side; and then lift the chin which is at the beginning inside the tickling up towards the positions above with the fingers of your left hand if the joint is dislocated in the inner positions.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then heat the cautery which has two points; and this is its form:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And then cauterize the chin so that it penetrates into the other side; and the figure of the cautery will come then from two-pointed cauteries.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is fine according to the amount of tickling; and this is its form:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And sometimes it is adjusted according to that account, for which there are eight cauteries.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And then put on the cautery some powder and let the patient adhere to tranquillity, and the limb should not be moved for any length of time until it is comforted.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is at the top and it is tight there, then cauterize the muscle with a pointed cautery or with some pointed cauteries, for the joint is confirmed and the humidity is broken up and the patient will be healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	Of cautery of the stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When there comes into the stomach a movement and masses of humidity which cause a swelling of its cavity, and if you continue with your methods of treatment and do not give in, then let the patient lie on his back with his head extended, and stretch out his arms and legs, and cauterize that with three cauteries: one cautery below the feet according to the length of a finger with a pointed cautery, and two cauteries below the ribs so that the figure of the cautery comes as a triangle; and let them not be too close together so that they may cause burning.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cautery is the thickness of two-thirds of a hair.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And let the figure of the cautery be according to this form. And if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form: and that shall be a cautery according to the form of a circle according to this form:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And let the stomach be punctured at that place from which this cautery is frightened: and you shall sense on the stomach according to the amount of tickling, and then cauterize that with a cautery in the points; and then cure that with the cure that has been mentioned before until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	Of cautery of the fried liver.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When there is pain in the liver from chilling or from humidity or from excessive wind which causes a swelling outside of its normal cavity, and it is cured with what has been said before and not giving in, then let the patient lie on his back on his chest, and sense the tickling with three cauteries according to this form and this amount placed upon the liver just below the hypochondria where the man lies.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And let the space between each cautery be according to the thickness of a finger, and let the cauteries be according to the length of the body rightwards.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not press with your hand against the cautery.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the amount of that which is burned is the thickness of the thickness of the tip of the chin, and it is not too close together; and if the patient lies on his feet; and if he is not, then let him sit, who has already stretched out his limbs, and lift up his arms.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And you are able to cauterize these cauteries with a scalpel when you have subtlety and prudence in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And beware of going too far in the cauterization, and let all the thickness of the chin be burned so that it reaches into the intestines, for the chin here is thin; and know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	Of puncturing of an abscess on the liver with a cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When there is an ulcer or abscess on the liver and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the liver or in its tunic, then if it is in the flesh of the liver, the patient will feel heavy and the pain will be acute.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the tunic of the liver, then there is great pain and many doctors have tired themselves in their cure of him.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	And so let the patient lie on his back; and then sense the place of the abscess with tickling; and then heat the cautery which is like a rake, the form of which is preceded in the other page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And cauterize with that cautery into the liver until all the thickness is burnt up, so that it reaches the brain, where a ulcer occurs.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that by the cure of other abscesses until it is healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And do not use this form of cautery unless that person whose study in the art of medicine is prolonged, and who has experienced many illnesses through it; but rather let that be done by us, and it is better.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	Of cautery of phlegmy humors.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	Dried the old cauteries of the roots of aristology for phlegmy humors according to this manner, and let that which you take from the roots of aristology be long and dry, and let it be as thick as a finger.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	And then submerge it in oil and heat it over the fire, and then cauterize with one cautery that place which is between the continuation of the furcula with the collar; and with two small cauteries below the guids, one a little declining towards the part where the beard grows, and with two cauteries at what declines between the fifth rib and the breastbone, declining a little to the parts behind; and with another cautery on the middle of the chest; and with three cauteries on the parts behind; and with one cautery in that place which is between the two shoulders, and with two cauteries on the sides of the chest below; and let there be a cautery in that place where it declines between the armpit and the breastbone.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And do not cover your hand with the cautery, but rather in the open air as it is working.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And some ancient writers say that they are some of the men who use cauterization with a piece of red hot iron, and apply it to that place between the ribs, until they reach the aposteme and the pus is discharged, as we have said about the aposteme in the liver.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	But with this cauterization one should not be afraid, because there is a fistula in the hole to which there is no cure.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter 30.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	Of the cauterization of the melsa.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you cure the sickness of the melsa with what we have said about the cure in division and do not apply your cure, then the cauterization on it is according to three ways, all of which are right, one of which is that you make three cauteries or four depending on the length of the melsa, according to the shape of the cauteries of the liver, the shape of which has preceded.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And there should be between each cautery the thickness of a finger or a little more, and the manner of the cautery is the same way we have said about the cautery of the liver equally.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not cover your hand with the cautery, and let the patient be on his back.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And another way of cauterizing is that you ignite the cautery having two bandages, the cause of which we have said in the chapter about the dislocation of the muscle, and elevate the vein which is in the edge of the melsa where the patient's left side lies without.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And let your elevation with which you elevate the vein be according to the length of the body, so that there are made cauteries according to the width of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And then insert the two bandages, ignited hot, in that place where you penetrate the vein from the other side.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And then withdraw the cautery; and thus there are made four cauteries.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you wish, cauterize with a cautery having three bandages.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And then you cure the cautery after it has been laid for several days, because the other causes precede in the cure.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	Of the cauterization of hydrops.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cauterize not in hydrops but in an ulcer properly.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you cure hydrops with the methods of cure which we have said about division and do not apply your cure, then that cauterize it with four cauteries around the omphalus and with one cautery over the stomach, and another cautery over the liver, and another cautery over the melsa, and two cauteries between the vertebrae of the back, and one cautery in the right side of the foot, and another cautery over the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the quantity of the depth of the cautery should be proportional to the thickness of the vein.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And then withdraw the cautery open so that it bleeds for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not evacuate the patient of cure after the cautery with what covers it so that there are added to him two tensions and he is healed by aid of the cure.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cautery with which the belly is cauterized should be key-like according to what its shape is above, and that with which the back is cauterized should be olive-like according to what its shape is above.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter 32.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	Of the cauterization of feet and thighs.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are apostematous in hydrops and filled with yellow water, then that cauterizes the feet on the instep of the foot in the space between the auricular and the annular, and elevate your hand with the cautery and do not twist it; and then elevate your hand, and do not return it at all, because the yellow water oozes out.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	It is the cautery according to this form: and then make two cauteries over the two thighs, and in each thigh there should be made cautery with the tip of the cautery knife.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And let the cautery be according to the length of the thigh: under the knee and the other under the middle part of the thigh; and over each thigh two cauteries.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And withdraw the wound open without its cure for a long time so that no water oozes from it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And then cure it with those causes which we have said.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter 33.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	Of the cauterization of the body of the belly.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When the body of the belly is because of a stroke and humidity that weakens the vessels, then there are the digestive and retentive vessels, which are in the stomach and in the intestines, and it is cured that with the methods of cure and do not apply, and sometimes the patient suffers cauterization of the vein that appears, then cauterize that with a large cautery over his stomach according to what has preceded in the cauterization of the stomach, with the cautery of the circle and four cauteries around the omphalus subtly, and with cautery key-like subtly; and with cautery over the alcine over the great vein, or two cauteries.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if you see the humidities exuding and the patient can tolerate it, then cauterize that over the pentacle and over the intestines, and tightly apply two cauteries over the stomach and near the groins, for there is perfect cure of healing of which there is no mistake.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter 34.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	Of the cauterization of old hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When there are in nature lingering hemorrhoids or one of thick humors rubbing or of corrupted humidities, and they are cured with what we have said about division and do not apply their cure, then cauterize it with three cauteries over the pus below the small vertebra of the back and small triangular, and with cautery above the navel.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that his stomach is swelled and his food is not digested, and sometimes his face is apostematous, then cauterize it over the stomach with a large cautery according to what has preceded; and with one cautery over the liver, and another cautery over the melsa of him with cautery key-like, and withdraw the cautery open for some time, and then cure him so that he is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	Of the cauterization of a hernia near its incision.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you excise a hernia, then ignite the cautery which is assembled like a ray.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Then insert that ignited in the hernia that is incised, and finish your hand so that it comes to the cautery at the opening of the vein from which the blood flows.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And do it once or twice, because if they are many, then cauterize each of them according to what we have reckoned, and then cure those with what they agree to them so that they are healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize with a large cautery over the great vein, there is more healing.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter 36.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	Of the cauterization of fistulas which are made in nature in the parts of him.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not obey the work which we have commanded in its place, and the patient is frightened by it, then let him be healed with cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Therefore when you see a fistula in nature appearing and it is old, and corrupt humidities, then what is better than it covers is that it is applied with a subtle needle, and then know the quantity of its depth with the above-mentioned needle.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Then light the cautery that resembles a rod.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And then place that cautery into the fistula, and according to the amount in which it enters, withdraw it.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And repeat with the cautery as many times as is necessary in order for those corrupted humors to be burnt - one or two or three times, depending on the amount that is needed.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And be careful of burning nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes into the bladder or the intestine, then be careful about all those locations; and do not do this unless the fistula is in a fleshy location which you think cannot penetrate.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	Then heal the area inside where it is healed.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the location is sealed and the matters are removed from it and remain like this for a long time, then know that it is completely healed.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the matters are not removed from it, then know that they have penetrated into the flesh and become corrupted there, or that it comes from one of those causes from which a recurrence will come in its place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter 37:
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	On cauterization of warts.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When in warts there is pain due to friction or due to a large windiness, and because of this the body of the patient is tormented, then know that you should cauterize those warts with a cautery needle from which you expect recurrence.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And quickly cauterize them again with a small needle, so that there will be three cauterizations, and then the warts will go away little by little in their growth.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter 38:
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	On cauterization of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When there is weakness and softening of the bladder due to friction and humidity so that the patient cannot retain urine, then cauterize that at the pus-like beginning of the bladder where the hairs of the pubic hair start, and cauterize with one cautery on the right side of it, and with another on its left.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And the length of each cautery should be according to the amount of the hairs; and cauterize that at the lowest pus-like part of the navel with one cautery or with two cauteries if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And let it be a cautery needle according to how it is processed.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter 39:
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	On cauterization of the hernia.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When there is friction and humidity in the hernia, and because of this impregnation is prohibited, and the menses are corrupted in him, and their provocation is delayed, and pain comes due to the carrying of them, then know that the location should be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, just as we have said in the cautery of the bladder; and with a cautery on the lowest pus-like part of the navel, or with two cauteries, and let it be a cautery needle.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter 40:
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	On cauterization of the dislocation of the elbow.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When mucous humors are infused into the part of the elbow, and these are caused by a displacement of its place, and a sign of it is that the joint is prolonged above the other when they are compared to each other.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the location of the dislocation is blocked in which part it is bent.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Therefore you should cauterize the patient on the part of the elbow with a circular cautery needle, because you will have sensed by touch in the circuit of the part as it is turned, and by doing so that the part falls to its proper place in the middle of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And let it be the cautery of which we spoke about earlier in the cauterization of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this cautery is not available to you, then cauterize it with three cauteries with a large olive-shaped cautery.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And let the cautery be done according to the quantity of the thickness of all the tendons; and then heal that inside which is healed.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter 41:
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	On cauterization of the sciatic nerve.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain comes in the part of the elbow, and its cause is friction and humidity, and the patient is not cured by what we have said, and that it is chronic, then know that you should let the patient out humors with stinking pills or artificial pills or similar; and then cauterize that.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And the way of the cautery for it is according to two ways: or cautery with burning medicines, or cautery with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	They go according to two known ways, one of which is that you cauterize it on the part of the joint with three triangular cauteries according to this form; and make good depth with those.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And let the space between each cautery be the quantity of the thickness of the finger, and if the cautery is olive-shaped or large.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	Sometimes let the cautery be on the middle part on the head of the elbow so that there are four cauteries.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you want, cauterize with the circle of which is preceded the form in the cauterization of the dislocation of the elbow, and that it be a containing circle and burn the thickness of all the tendons.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the way of cauterization in sciatica when pain is adherent to the elbow and it is not extended within the joint.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	But if it is extended within the joint, then cauterize that with two cauteries on the thigh over the location to which the pain goes; and with one cautery over the shoulder four fingers away from the hairy part.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if the cautery cuts it, then let the depth of the cautery be according to the quantity of the thickness of the tendon.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the pain goes so that it is extended within the place near to the fingers of the feet, then cauterize that where it goes in with a cautery for three points or four, or more if it demands of that.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the pain goes from below the neck towards the joint, then cauterize that there with a cutting cautery.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And beware in all cauterization that you do not end with the cautery when burning nerve or large artery, and so that through this to you it is upon the patient great harm or convulsion.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And some of those cauterized on the shoulder and ended in cauterization, and a bed a fire inflamed within which the tumor was conquered the foot, and fire perforated and corrupted all of the foot.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	Then strong inflammation of the abdomen occurred, and then death followed.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two parts simultaneously cauterize each according to this way.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And some wise men said in the cauterization of the elbow that this is the way of the cautery: make it similar to a nail of iron of which its circuit is the length of a palm; and let its orifices be according to the thickness of a finger of date or less.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And within that circle let there be another third; and let the space between them be the quantity of the fingers of the toes; and let those circles be bent in two parts; and let the length of them be a finger or two fingers, and make in those margins of iron decently bent in the circles; and this is the form for it:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Then let it be heated in the fire so that it becomes red hot and let it be placed over the part of the elbow, the patient lying on his side.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	Then cauterize that with three cauteries around in one day.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And let it lie like this for three days; then cover the wound with a poultice and keep the area open for several days; then heal the wound by applying ointment until it is cured.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Al-Buqaysi : Oh sons, we have used this type of cautery sparingly due to the fear of causing harm and because few of us have been able to practice it successfully.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	May God help those who suffer from these cauteries, and may they find relief from their pain.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	May cauteries with healing medications help you to make two circles, a hole in the middle of which a key or small iron ring is placed; the length of the needle should be the size of two nuts or hazelnuts.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And the space between them should be equal to the thickness of a finger; and they should be open below and above, and they should fit together like this:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	Then place the patient's arm over his side, and press your hand on the part of the armpit; then take a piece of wool and dip it between the two circles, and let its quality be gradually heated by the fire, and hold it for an hour, and let the patient endure the biting and squeezing—for he will feel biting as if by fire—until the biting stops.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And then raise your hand with the instrument and wipe the armpit clean with warm water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	Let it lie like this for three days and place a poultice on it until the swelling of the bite goes down; then let him go about his business after a few days; this is the ultimate cure.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And heal it with ointment until it is cured.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	If the pain extends into the thigh or leg, make him lie in a position where he can hold water according to how it is done in the armpit.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is how you use warm water, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the preparation of medications.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Take a piece of alkali and non-extinguished ashes from both ends, grind them and place them in a new woolen cloth whose bottom has a small hole, according to the amount that goes into him.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	Then place another woolen cloth on top of it which has been dipped in cold water, and pour over the alkali and live embers a little warm water, which covers them like a finger; then compress them with your hand with good compression, and let the water that drips from him go into the bottom cloth.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	Then gather all the water and pour it over the other live embers and renewed alkali, because this water becomes very strong when heated; it is used in many medical operations and cauterizations of other parts, because this operation produces fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And among the medications are some with which wide cauterizations are performed, such as teresium and honey mixed with sulfur, and embers of soap that have been ground.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And Galien relates from an ancient man the operation and cure by which sciatic nerve pain is cured; he says that it does not need any other cure, and that it heals like a wound that is healed by a poultice, because the pain goes away very quickly when treated in this way.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And it should be picked from a certain tree, and if it is not found, then take a fig; the wood should be ground to a powder and placed on the arm, thigh or leg where there is pain, and it should be bound.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	Let it lie for three hours or for as long as the patient can tolerate the biting.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And then put him in a bath and when his body is warm, expose him to the sun, for the pain will cease and he will be healed.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	Know that it is not advisable for anyone to use these medications with cauteries unless there is an evacuation of the body.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	May God help you, Escorides said that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat's dung, it helps very much; and the cautery should be done in this way: take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it between the toes of the foot and between the bones.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And then take dry goat's dung and inflame it with fire until it turns into charcoal; then place it on the wool and let it lie until it is cold.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	Then repeat this, and do not stop doing this until the pain in the armpit goes away and the biting stops.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this way of cauterizing is called the cow cautery.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 42.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	Of cauterization for pain in two places.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Sometimes back pain occurs for various reasons, such as from a blow or a wound or from excessive evacuation, and for similar reasons, from the infusion of wet and moist matter.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And cauteries are not performed unless in this sole case where it is caused by the infusion of moist matter.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Then, if there is evacuation of the patient with pills that are made over the back where there is pain in three lines according to its width, because three cauteries or more, according to the tolerance of the patient and his strength, are performed on each line.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And cauterization should be done with a pointed cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, cauterize with three cauteries or four with a nail-like cautery according to this form:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 43.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	Of cauterization at the beginning of gout.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Many times this disease occurs in small children; and the sign of its beginning in children is that they get stiff in their limbs, and there is elevation and movement.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And there is pain in the last vertebra of the back and of the knots that begin to rise above the other vertebrae.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And therefore when you see this and want to prevent it, then cauterize it with a cautery that is a circle according to this form:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	take the cautery and place it over the entire part of the vertebra evenly.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you want, cauterize around the circuit of the vertebra with a pointed cautery in two or three lines.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	Let the points be close to each other.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	And then heal the area until it is cured with what we have said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	Be careful that cauteries are not performed in gout that is caused by nerve spasms.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 44.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	Of cauterization for gout and joint pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And therefore when gout caused by wet matter is cured with a poultice and the pains are not relieved, then cauteries are performed.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And you cauterize it around the circuit of the joint of the foot with many cauteries.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let the cautery be olive-colored; and this is how it should be:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pains spread to the tendons or other joints, and this often happens, then cauterize each tendon with three cauteries or four in each place with this olive-colored cautery.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if you need to cauterize the patient, then it is necessary that these cauteries are at your disposal; therefore, cauterize him and do not press too hard with your hand before applying the cautery instrument, but only around the area of the vein.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pain extends into the abdomen and back, then administer the cautery as we have described in its chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pain is only in the hands and is called sciatica, then make points around the fire holes as they revolve; make two lines of points.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if there is pain in the fingers, then point around the fire holes on each knuckle and on the palm of the hand.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pain goes for a few days into the joints or muscles, then cauterize each of them in every part of the affected area.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And if the patient is not healed after good treatment and reception of medicines, because if good treatment and phlegm are evacuated with this cautery they will be healed, God willing.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 45.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	On the cauterization of broken bones.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When a break occurs in the angles and intestines in front of the aorta in the abdomen, and this is where it begins, then you should order the patient to stop eating for a day and to use mild laxatives so that the swelling goes down from his belly.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	Then follow the patient's back with your hands, and command him to hold his breath when the hole is being probed or when the aorta or intestines are appearing.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	Then return it with your fingers and examine the break on the bone of the finger, indicating the extremity which is similar to half a circle in the upper parts of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then light the cautery, of which this is its shape:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	until it becomes a red-hot wire.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient' s thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	Then place the cautery on that sign with your hand holding the cautery straight, and put it there until you reach the bone of the finger within the joint; and repeat with another application if you have not achieved it in the first application to the bone.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	And carefully observe the movement of the intestine at the time of cauterization, so that you do not burn it so that the patient does not die or suffer some other great harm.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And know that when you with the cautery do not touch the bone, your operation will be useless.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And see that the cautery for children is subtle according to their size and age.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	Then treat the place of the cautery with ointment for three days, until the scar from the fire has healed.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then cure it with other remedies until it is healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And the patient should lie on his back for 40 days, until the wound and the scar are sealed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And see that he receives nourishment according to the length of time of his healing, which is determined by how long it takes for his belly to heal, and that the intestine does not come out due to the effort of healing.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And when he wants to get up after 40 days, then administer a gently made sling, and have him wear it for another 40 days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And let him be spared from work and overindulgence in food and drink, and violent movements, for when he uses this healing regimen completely, he will be healed.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And we have described the cure for broken bones in other parts of the belly, and so at the beginning, and you should not delay, cauterize the break with a round cautery according to its size; and then cure it with what we have said, and if it is not adjusted.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And some first say that a broken bone should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, because it is probed and felt as follows:
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	And a line is drawn perpendicular to the length of the bone above and below the break, and your hand is placed with a nail-like cautery, but the first cautery is lighter and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	On the cauterization of a dislocation.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When a pain occurs in any part due to displacement or blow, and the pain persists for a long time and does not yield to any treatment with medicines, then you should cauterize it with a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And the cautery of every member is according to its size and smallness, and its nature and condition, and location of the dislocation and pain in it.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	So if he is healed by the first cautery, well and good; but if not, then repeat it on him, for usually from those pains there are points in a member that approaches the patient, so that you can achieve them with cautery until the patient is healed.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	On the cauterization of leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	The lepers some times are cauterized for great benefit by the hot cautery, and especially if the leprosy is caused by putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And so when you want to cauterize him, consider if the leprosy is dry and cured with what we have said in the division, and do not touch it, nor this, and beware that the corruption extends throughout his body and all its parts, then cauterize him on the head with 5 cauteries: one in the middle of the head, and the second below him, lifting up the forehead to the end of the hair; and both over the horns, and one behind, on the nape or neck; and both over the ears, on the temples.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And finally your hand with the cautery a little in the bone to make a small impression, and from him the scabs are displaced, so that the expiration of thick vapors is relieved from him; and cauterize on the ulcer according to its need.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if the leprosy has spread over the body and appears manifestly, then you should cauterize him with those cauteries which we have mentioned in the head; and cauterize on the end of the nose, and two cauteries on both sides of the ears, and two cauteries on the two shoulders, and six cauteries on the spine, and one large cautery on the spine near the chest, and one over the neck, and two over the armpits, and one over each shoulder blade, and two over the hips, and one over each knee, and two over the shins, and two over the heels, and two over the muscles, and two over all the joints of the hands and feet, and over every tendon of the hands and feet.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And beware of the nerves which are on the instep, so that you do not burn them.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	And sometimes it is cauterized with one cautery on the bone of the finger, and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the throat.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And know that when you draw the cauteries closer, then it is more beneficial and beneficial; and know that if the patient does not have pain in the cautery, then his body is already stupified.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And the cautery should be large or small according to the parts and joints, as it is preceded by the properties of the tools.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then treat the cautery with wheat flour mixed with honey and other remedies until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	On cauterization for stupor.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When a limb is paralyzed or asleep and is not healed by medicines, oils and plasters, then cauterize the paralyzed limb with cauteries according to the size of the limb or its smallness.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And let your cautery enter the thickness of the vein a little.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then treat that with ointment until it is healed.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And sometimes a paralysis is cauterized which affects the hands and feet, and the vertebrae of the back, and you see the movement of the nerves which move that limb, and the paralysis is improved.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	But do not presume about this except for one who is skilled in anatomy of the parts and the exit of the nerves through all the body.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	On cauterization for white leprosy.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When leprosy is old and does not respond to any of the ointments of medicine, then cauterize it with a cautery made from pitch according to the quantity of the thickness of the vein so that the whiteness and color of it are improved and its color changed.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	Then treat that with wheat flour and lentil flour mixed with rose oil and leaves of the arnica rose, and pigeon blood or thrush blood, let each be a part and all be mixed together, then line a cloth and place it on the spot until it is healed.
Capitol .l.	Chapter 50.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	On cauterization for cancer.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When a cancer begins and you want to stop it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery around the edge of it as it is being rolled up.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And the wise say that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle of it; but I have not seen this, for I fear that it will be ulcerated and I have seen this happen a few times.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And it is more direct that it should be cauterized around the edge of it with a circular cautery as we have said, or with many cauteries.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 51.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	On cauterization for dimness of sight.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When dimness of sight is delayed in ripening, and it is because of the excess making it, or because of the state of the patient, for he is old and decrepit, with little blood, or because of time, and you want to hasten the ripening of dimness of sight; then cauterize around the edge of it with many small puncturing cauteries; and then let her hasten in ripening.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	But if you want to pierce it with a cautery, then heat the cautery of which this is the form of it: and place that in the middle of dimness of sight so that it penetrates the vein.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the cautery is in that place which is lower down, so that the arm of the body is raised; then treat that until it is healed.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 52.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	On cauterization for corrosion.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corrosion is a rotting walking in the limb, which corrodes it like fire eating dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore if you see corrosion in a place which can suffer cauterization by fire, then heat small nail cauteries, and large ones according to what is appropriate in that place in which there is corrosion.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	Then cauterize that throughout its whole length so that you eradicate all the corrosion and not leave any cause of it remaining.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	Then let that be for three days, and place on the cauterized spots a poultice of soft bread with mixed oil so that the scars are all eradicated and all the corrosion.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	Then treat that with ointments engendering flesh.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	But if after three days you see that the flesh is not growing and is healthy where there is no corrosion, then it is good; but if not, then repeat the cauterization on that which is rotten in the places of corruption.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And corrosion is treated some times with sharp medicine because it is midway between cauterization.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	But however cauterization by fire is the most dangerous course of action.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And I have already said its treatment with sharp medicine in division, and therefore take that when it has a beginning in growth.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 53.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	On cauterization of sores and of the others like them.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Many times sores come from beneath the foot of a sick person which is called a claw, and it is a great cause, boring into the foot; and cauterization in those sores is according to two methods, namely cauterization by fire and cauterization by water.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	But cauterization by fire is that you ignite the cautery made like a lead pencil, which should be made of iron according to the quantity which contains the claw throughout its whole length, and it should be of subtle thickness.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	Then place that ignited cautery on the claw and then revolve your hand with the cautery around the edge of the claw so that the cautery reaches the depth of the claw.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	Let that be for three days until it starts to emit the arm.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	Then poultice that with malva leaves crushed with salt, and place the poultice on it for one night, for that will eradicate from its roots.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	Then treat that spot with ointment engendering flesh until it is healed.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if it does not convert and often affects the surface of the body, chiefly in the hands and feet, then take that you administer in those cauteries water, and it is that you insert a cannula of iron or lead or bone, and place that on the claw; and let the water enter through the entrance of the root of the claw, and wait for the sick person for an hour, and then remove that, for the claw with its roots will have been eradicated.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And do the same for those the others which come over all of them in the body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	Then treat those sores whose roots have been eradicated with that of the ointments engendering flesh.
Capitol .liiii.	Chapter 54.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	On cauterization for trembling.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When trembling comes from rubbing on a nerve or from fever caused by rubbing, or from some other cause resembling it, then take that you cauterize that with four cauteries or with V-shaped cauteries between each of the vertebrae; and cauterize on the feet of him, and on his stomach with olive oil.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the trembling of him is rested and hastened by the sickness caused by rubbing.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter 55.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	On cauterization for accidental wounds on the body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When in the body so are broken blisters and there are large holes which are made from corrupt gross matter; therefore take that at the beginning as it appears, that it is cauterized on all heads of the fistula with a subtle cautery made from myrrh wood, the tip of which is extended with fire; or with long razors; or with a cautery slowly.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And sometimes it is cauterized with a caustic at the beginning of its emission according to this manner; and they are not broken, and the superficiality is split making those wounds heal from them.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	But nevertheless it is necessary that this be done with an evacuation by phlebotomy.
Capitol lvi.	Chapter 56.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	Of the cauterization of blood flow from an accidental wound by incision of the artery.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Troops seen thereupon flow of artery which is cut under the plague, or under the incision of abscesses or cautery of limb, and others alike, and it is difficult to heal that.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Therefore when it happens to someone, then you·t cover with your hand at the opening of the artery, and place your finger inside narrow that opening so that the flow of blood is stopped under your finger, and that it does not come out.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And then place on the fire the olive cauteries, few and large, by many numbers, and exhale over them so that many embers light.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And then take of those one small or large according to the site and the plague in which the artery is broken, over that vein quickly as you have stopped with your finger, and apply the cautery there until it is bound and stopped that blood.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the blood is expelled from the opening of the artery when you release your finger and loosen the cautery, then take another cautery carefully from the cauteries which in the fire are prepared, and then do not cease doing that one after another until the blood is constricted.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And beware that you don't burn the nerve which is here, and that it come over the patient any other evil.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And know that when from the artery flows blood, then it is not possible in those to constrict the blood, and most when the artery is large, if not by one of four ways: or by cautery as we have said, or by incision when it is not extracted, for when it is extracted the ends of it are burned and the blood is constricted, or that it be tied with a ligature or with a bandage by strong constriction, or that medicines whose virtue is to constrict the blood be applied over it; and that they be bound with a bandage with decent compression.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	But he who administers a decent constriction of it with a bandage and compression with burning causes and alike does not confer anything except misery.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	But if this happens to someone and the doctor is not present nor medicine, then open with your finger on the opening of that vein as we have said, and understand to the great constriction of it until the blood is stopped from the principal part of the plague, and over the artery the finger is not released; and over the artery is sprinkled water mixed with something greatly cold until the blood is congealed and thickened; and according to what need there is for cautery or medicine.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Begin the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Of incision and piercing and puncturing and phlebotomy and of plagues and of their alike.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are the words of Albucasis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have already said in the first chapter all the diseases in which cautery by fire is convenient and the medicines burning, and their occasions and causes, and the instruments in which necessary are the forms of the cauteries; and we have ordered the chapters from the supra-occipital region of the head until the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And we will proceed in this chapter in that same way, so that the reader of it may be eased in that, then about that for which he has asked.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And before we begin that, know, son, that in this chapter is for terror that which is in the first chapter of cauterization.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And because of that it is in him great caution, for in the operation which is in this chapter many times there is an evacuation that which is with blood with which life is over the sprinkling of the vein or incision upon the abscess or opening of the wound or cleansing of the plague or extraction of arrow or piercing of stone and their alike.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And from all those are accompanied by fear and trembling and in the end of them death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I warn you that upon you not fall that in which there is danger, for some times it happens by methods of men with many methods of diseases.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And from them is one who dies from his disease and is the longer of his disease, and by the severity of what he finds from his disease, and from the length of his disease, and because the disease means death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And from those is he who gives you hope and word, you hoping in his health, and his disease is perilous.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And therefore not think that you consent in he who comes to you of whom this manner is; and your caution be greater than confidence and your rapacity, and not presume any cause about that except certain science which verifies that over you, and to whose favor laudable succession perishes.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And use in the cure of all your diseases of prognosis and indication of he to whom is converted health, for in him is over you helper in acquisition of fame and memory, of laudation and of glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	O son, God inspire your understanding and not withhold from you direction and protection, for that is in his hand.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have ordered this chapter distinguishing by chapters according to what precedes in the chapter of cauteries, of the cure of the head until the feet, so that it is eased for you that which you ask from that and of which you have need.
Capitol primier.	First Chapter.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	Of the cure of water which is contained in the head of children.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	Know that this disease many times happens to children over childbirth and when the nurse shakes the head of the infant he has lightheadedness.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And some times by obscure cause which is not known.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	But I have not seen this disease except in children; and to all those for whom I have seen it the death lies in wait, and by that is to me been shown action in them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I have seen an infant whose head was full of water, and the head of him was always magnified until he could not stand over his parents because of the bigness of his head, and but that the moisture was increased by fire death.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this moisture is increased between the scalp and the bone, or it is increased below the bone upon the brain.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	For the operation in he if the moisture is between the scalp and the bone and the abscess is small, then know that you split in the middle place of the head with one split in the breadth, and let the length of the split be two notches so that the moisture may run; and this is the form of the spatulum:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And therefore if the moisture is more increased and the abscess is larger, then are here two splits according to this manner:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the moisture is below the bone, sign of he is that you see the seams of the head open all over and the water is drawn out when you compress it with your hand to the splits; and this is not to you hidden.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	Know that you split in the middle place of the head with three splits according to this manner:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And then extract all the moisture, and then tighten the splits with bandages and plasters, and then embed he in wax and oil on the fifth day, and then loosen the binding and cure the wound with tentas and ointments, and strengthen the head with equality; and feed the patient with dry food of little moisture so that the member is comforted and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	There is another method of incision that considers the size of the abscess and the collection of pus, as it may be larger in the occipital region, or in the area in front, or on the right or left side; therefore, pay attention to the incision where the abscess appears and the gathering of pus, and do this according to what is best possible for you.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that you do not cut the artery and cause a flow of blood and kill the patient through that flow of blood with the evacuation of moisture.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter II.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	Of the incision of the arteries which are close to the ears, called the carotid arteries.
Capitol segon.	Chapter II.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When there is a wound or ulcer on the legs or feet, and it becomes old, and the treatment with medicines does not work, then the next best course of action is to make an incision in those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And then, when you want to cut the arteries that the patient raises his head, and you have wiped the area with a sharp cloth so that the arteries appear, and you have tightened the neck of the patient with some cloth; and you should look for the pulse in the vein; and these locations are above the locations that are close to the ears, and they are hidden in most people.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And you should press on the artery with your finger, and cut each one with a sharp knife, coming in at an angle towards the bone, and do this around the width of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you want, insert the knife below the artery and cut it in relation to the parts above.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And the length of the incision should be about two fingers wide, because when a vein is cut, the blood rushes out with a pulsating exit, which jumps out frequently.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	But if the artery does not appear at the neck, then you should measure from the ear the quantity of space of three fingers, and press with your finger, and go into the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And that which flows out is a quantity of wine, one ounce. And the flow is very little or not at all, and all of this depends on the condition of the patient and the fullness of the artery in him.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And you should consider the wound, and if something remains on the bone as a cause of pain, then cut it so that it does not cause an abscess.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And you should stretch the wound with tweezers and with linen cloth, and cure it with ointment inside so that it heals.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	Of the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When someone experiences ancient migration or ulcers, due to humid, hot, and painful humors in the temples, or if there is an old sore that is violent and similar to these, and it is treated with the methods of medicinal healing without success, then we have found that extraction of the arteries in the temples, or cauterization of those places as I have shown, is effective.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the manner of the operation and extraction of those is that the patient raises his head; and understand the artery which appears in the temple, for it is shown to you by its pulse, and it is hidden in most people due to the intensity of the beating.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden from you, then the neck of the patient should be tightened with some cloth; and you should wipe the area with a sharp cloth or moisten the place with warm water until you see the artery clearly.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then you take the knife, which has this shape:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And you cut the skin with it easily so that you reach the artery; and you push into it deeply and extract it from the upper parts so that you pull it out of the skin and discover it from under the membranes which are under it, from every part.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	But if the artery is thin, then you wrap it with the tip of your fingers, and cut it from that place in a way that depends on the quantity by which its extremities are extended and contracted, and there will be no flow of blood, because if they are not cut, the blood cannot flow out at all.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And you should draw off an ounce of blood. three to four times.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the artery is large, then you must ligate it in two places with strong, double threads of linen or with cords far apart so that there is no decay before the healing of the wound and so that there is no flow of blood.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And you cut off the superfluity which is between two membranes; and do this in that hour or another hour.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you want, cauterize it with a cautery into the bone with a cutting cautery so that its extremities are cut off, and it will remain in place instead of that operation.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it is better to do this when the patient does not have fever or is of cold complexions; because cauterization helps to drive out fine humors, and therefore it is better for youthfulness.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And it is fitting to extract the arteries which appear at the site of an old wound, and have powder decently made laid upon them, and then let it be cured with dry medicines causing the flesh to heal and with poultices so that it becomes healthy.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if while you operate there happens to be a flow of blood from the artery, then you tie that blood, or with cauterization, or by pressing on the site of the wound, and tighten your hand so that the blood is constricted.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if none of those causes is present to you, then place your finger on the spot where the blood has coagulated, and moisten the place with warm water of strong intensity so that the keenness is relieved, and tighten according to what you can.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And what is more difficult in the extraction of an artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two points, because you have felt the two places with your finger, and placed them, heated with fire, so that they reach the bone and cut the vein in two places, so that it becomes elongated between its extremities, because it has not been consolidated at all by this cauterization.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the shape of the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And the keenness of its two points is equal.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	But if it is more acute than two points, which is better because if they are sharp when they approach each other on both sides and do not cut into the flesh with speed.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore, if there is any thickness in them, it is held that the heat of the fire is less in those and the flesh is cut off more widely.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this operation is better in all works and more distant.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And let the space between its two points be the quantity of the thickness of a finger.
Capitol quart.	Chapter IV.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	Of the cure of acute and sour wounds of the gulfs.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When they are sour wounds, and the veins of which they are above on the forehead, and there is no cause for the cure with medicine, and the face of the patient becomes red and feels in his forehead as if it were walking with ants, and the ears of that one are exhausted, perspiring so that the hair of them is known, and the eyelids are swollen due to the keenness of tears, the old ones experienced in the cure of those by this operation, and they call that cure with the sponge.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And you command the patient to raise his hair which is on his forehead, and then cut three gashes evenly distant according to the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the crack is two fingers wide: one crack should be evenly distant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a little movement of the eyelids which are in the tear duct, and the third on the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And be careful at the beginning of the arches which are on both sides, and lengthen your hand from the continuation of both mandibles.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space of each incision is the amount of three fingers wide.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And to you a piece of sponge equipped or dry cloths moved with which you dry the blood.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	Then insert the spatula of two acute ends, of which this is the shape of its incision:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	that is from the part of the temples between to the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Gouge out with that all the gordian which is between two incisions with the chisel which is above the bone, and then do that of the middle incision into the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And then spread that spatula and insert into the first incision again another instrument which is called a cutlass, sharp on one side and blunt on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And pause the side of that sharp against the meat annexed to the gordian, and the side of it against the bone, and use that until it comes to the middle crack, and cut with that all the vessels that descend from the head to the armpits.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	Let the incision be continued until it comes to the gordian, and then do that in the middle crack into the other crack.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And after the blood has run equally, squeeze out the places of the congealed blood.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then put into each crack a cotton wool with old wine vinegar, and put over that powders wetted in wine and oil, and bandages so that it does not develop an ulcerous wound.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day loosen the bandage and give a great infusion of warm water or tea, and then cure that with basilicon ointment made with rosin oil and others so that the wounds may be healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	Of the cure of warts by cauterization and from the armpits descending from the parts within the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When to someone warts come and continue, and you see the armpits of the patient emaciated little, and already the guarding of them is weakened, and the eyelids ulcerated and from there hairless, and in the forehead an acute pain piercing and consequent estrangement result, then know through these accidents that the materials and warts do not come but from certain veins of the parts within proceeding.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best cure in those is this: that you command the patient to shave his forehead, and then cut into that a crack in the middle of the forehead, a little by width (and begin with the crack of the left temple into the right temple; and let it be an incision into the bone; and lengthen your hand from the eyelids of the temples which are worn away because of chewing), so that the bone may be uncovered.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry all the blood with a sponge or dry cloth, and then fill in between the two lips of the crack with old cotton or dry cloth.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then tighten it above with powders wetted in wine and oil so that it does not develop an ulcerous wound.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you loosen that and see that the ulcer is already diminished, then know that it is rubbed on the bone where it begins in him naked meat, and then cure that with an exsiccative regimen which makes the meat wither, just as if you take from wheat flour two parts and of colophony four parts and mix them together, and make a plaster of it and administer it to those wounds of the meat.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter 6.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	Of the cure of what bites in the ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	The whole cause that bites in the ears is one of four species, for it is either mineral stone or a cause similar to stone, like iron and glass, or it is from a plant, like chickpeas or beans, or a volatile cause, like water and wine and their likes, or some animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And therefore when stone bites in the ear or another cause similar to those causes which do not fit into it but grow in the ear, and put the ear to the sun, and if you see the stone, then distill from that some cause of violet oil or sesame oil, and then administer its distillation, and make it sneeze with a condiment, and stop up the nostrils by reason of the sneezing.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And then put around the ear some pieces of cloth or wool, and stretch out the ear to the sides above it, for many times it is bored through by these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not bored through, then administer its distillation with the instrument called very sharp curved forceps, of which this is the shape:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it is bored through with forceps, let it be; and if not, then administer its extraction with a subtle hook of little bending.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And therefore if it is not bored through by that, then make a cannula of ram and insert the end of the cannula into the hole of the ear and close the end of the cannula with wax and with softened oil so that only the cannula be open.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And then extract with your own wind with strong吸引力, for troops have been seen with it.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	But if it is not bored through in this manner, then take alum or prepared vetches with which they are pressed the ears a little quantity, and put that into the end of ray, and then wrap around that decently paused cotton.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And then insert that into the hole of the ear with ease, and then draw out the ear from moisture.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And therefore if it is not bored through with all the causes which we have recounted, then you cut back such before it develops an ulcerous wound or spasm.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the manner of cutting it back is that you at first cause the blood vessels of the sephasic vein to be shaken and extracted according to the manner of its nature, and then make that to cease between your hands and turn the ear to the sides above it, and stop with a little crack in the root of the ear by reason of the grey matter in the place where you see it pressed from within.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And let the crack be of moon shape so that it may come to the stone, and when the stone is driven in, pull it out with appropriate instruments; and then close up the crack at that time with speed, and cure that so that it may be healed.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause bites in the ear is one of the fats that grow and become swollen, then administer its cure and extraction; but if it does not obey your command, then you take a very subtle spatula according to this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	and administer with that the incision of that fat which is bitten in the ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not do that when you think it is already moistened by the vapor of the ear, and put that in many pieces, and then extract those with hooks or with very subtle forceps, or by incision just as we have said, for the extraction of it is made easier.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	But in the water which is entered into the ear let the patient sneeze with a condiment at the beginning, and fill his own ear with old cotton, and put that over that ear in which there is the water, and if by that it is bored through, let it be; and if not, then take thin stones and leans according to their length, and heat those in the fire a little, and let the patient insert one of those into the hole of his ear and suck with one of those on that spot and press with another stone upon that stone which is bitten in the ear.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	So do not stop this until all the water has been discharged.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc .i., e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And when the water has been discharged, take some paper or linen and place it and put one end in the ear and extend the other end with fire until it is burnt.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And then put in another piece of linen and do this as many times as is necessary until all the water has been discharged, and then tie it with a string like that which was described for the stone extractor.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	But for the extraction of an object that has entered the ear, if it is a small object, similar to a bean or pea, treat it as we have said in the previous section; but if it is a large object which is causing pressure on the brain, then administer the extraction using forceps and pincers, and the cause of this is usually a foreign object lodged in the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	But in the extraction of a worm that has been generated in the ear, when you treat it as we have said in the previous section and in the treatise on distillations, and do not follow our instructions for your treatment, then you should look at the ear in the sunlight.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if some cause of the worm appears there, then extract it using forceps or a fine pair of pincers; but if nothing appears, then take a tube that is narrow at one end and broader at the other, like this:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And insert the narrow end into the ear according to how much pain the patient can endure; and then suck hard with it, doing this several times, until all the worms are discharged.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	But if he does not obey you, then stop up the end of the tube with wax as we have said; and then administer the distillations which were described by the ancients in the treatment of worms, and you will find them in the treatise on distillations.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let your effusion be that by which you pour the medical oils into the ear with this instrument, of which this is the form:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And let it be made of silver or brass; narrow at the bottom and having a small hole in it, and flat on top.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And then let it be fitted with a plug so that it fits into the cavity of the container where it will be necessary.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you wish, take the reed and wrap its end decently with cotton, and then pour oil into the cavity of the instrument, or juice from any herb, or anything you wish from these medicines, into the tube — and that is inserted in the ear —, and then put in the reed with its end wrapped, and squeeze it with your hand that which is wrapped with a templed compression around it until the oil is expelled into the cavity of the instrument and the patient feels the oil inside.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And what has been poured into the ear should already be made warm with fire a little bit.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And take care that the cause which you distill into the ear is not too hot, for the medicines of the ears cannot endure excessive heat.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter 7
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	On the treatment of ear obstructions.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Some children are born with a membrane blocking the ears of their mothers; and this also happens in some adults, an obstruction in the middle of the ear due to phlegm or a growth there; and this obstruction sometimes occurs in the opening of the ear-drum which does not reach the brain, and sometimes it is in the outer parts.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And that which happens in the middle part, which does not reach the brain, is in the greater dispositions of difficult cure.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in that which you reach the brain, let the patient's ear be exposed to the sun and look at it.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And therefore if you see any inflammation, open that with a subtle spatula of which this is the form:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If its end is small, let one side be pointed and the other not; and the spatula should be of two sides like a lion's claw so that it does not injure the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And if the obstruction is due to a growth in the ear or in the middle part, then open that with fine pincers and cut it easily until all the growth is removed.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the obstruction is in the membrane of the ear, then take a fine reed and heat it with fire for just a little while, and then put that into the middle of the ear.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And therefore if you have sensed inflammation with what the patient feels with ease due to the difficulty of breathing, relieve the oppression of it with ease; and take care that you do not injure the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then place over the ear a bandage of linen according to the size of the opening which you have wrapped around the egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure that the wound is healed; or else take some water and dip it in vinegar and sprinkle it on it, and if you see that the ear is already swollen, then take that off and replace it with another bandage which you have wrapped around cerated oil, until the swelling is reduced; and then treat it until it is cured.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	But if blood flows from it, then soak sponge or bandage in warm water and place it over the ear, and use the other treatment which constricts the flow of blood, which is described in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 8
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	On the cure for athelis which occurs in the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Athelis which appear in the eyelids of some people are wet some days and dry on others.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Therefore let you have those with thong-like instruments or pincers, and split them with a spatula at their roots, and then place over the places thus split with oil.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	But if pain comes with a flow of blood, then cauterize those with a small subtle lance.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the better cautery is when the splits and wounds return as soon as any cause from their roots is removed; and when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burnt up and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter 9
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	On the cure for granulation which appears in the eyelids of people.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Many times it occurs in the eyelids of people some cause which is likened to granulation in its strength and hardness, and because of that granulation is called.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And it is an accumulation of thick moisture in the eyelid above and below.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	And its appearance in it is that you should consider if the granulation proceeds from something which appears in the eyelid and is swollen on all sides; and the cause of it is diverse.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Therefore open that with a slit according to its width, and then scrape it from all sides with ease until it discharges, and then stop that up with pincers and cut off those roots.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	But if you are not prepared for its incision if it does not penetrate the eyelid with a little incision, then that will not be noticed in any cause.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the wound is large, then you should stitch it up; and treat it until it is healed.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is small, you will not do harm to it unless its roots are restored and the flesh grows over it.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the granulation is declining at the edges of the eyelid, then cut away its surface and stop it up with pincers; and if you make an incision there, that will not be noticed in any cause.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And then the incision, wash the wound with salted water; and heal the wound with oil until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	Of the cure of a ulcer in the eyelid above the eye.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Ulcers are grey in colour and are usually found on the eyelids above, and mainly affect infants. They harm the eyes of those affected, and they cannot bear the brightness of the sun because of this; therefore tears flow from their eyes.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And because of this you will see these people always looking down at the ground, and sleeping with their mouths open; and there is swelling and redness in their eyelids, and when you press on the eyelid, you can feel a lump underneath.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And a certain type of poultice is applied to the patient who rests his head on your lap; and you prepare a cloth and make it warm, and make a circle according to the size that fits the whole ulceration, and you place this over the ulcer and press with your fingers all around so that the pus collects under the poultice.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	But in the primary stage, you must split the skin completely so that you reach the pus, for ulcers develop in this way through a fissure according to the shape of a white swelling.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Then extract this with cloths which you have wrapped between your fingers at the edges, and rub between the right and left hands until it is dispersed.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And be careful not to touch the ulcer with your fingers so that you do not hurt the patient while extracting it with the spatula.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	But if pus does not appear at the beginning of the fissure, then touch it gently with a spatula so that pus comes out; and then extract it as we have said before; and then moisten cloths in water and vinegar, and place them over the ulcer and bind those with bandages.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And also apply salt to the wound and place it in the cavity of the fissure so that any remaining humidity is absorbed.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then heal the ulcer until it is cured.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	But if a scab forms on the wound, then heal it with soft poultices until it is healed.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	Of ways of feeling the ulcer.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When the eyelids of the eyes are affected by something which is placed under them and are old, then these cause pain in the eye and make conditions of illness appear as constant tears and softening of the eyelids and tissue until it becomes a cause of destruction of the eye, which is called tactinir of the eye, and it is healed in four ways: either by cauterisation with fire; or with an acute medicine as mentioned earlier in the chapter on cautery; or tactinir is caused by incision and suture; or with cannulas, as I will say.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And so place the patient's head in your lap; and lift up the eyelid of the eye with your left hand, and if it is lifted, that is good; but if not, insert a needle into where the pus is underneath the eyelid, and push the needle upwards towards the eyebrow, and let it be close to the margin of the eyelid where the hairs are — close to the hairs — and pull the needle upwards towards the eyebrow, and convert the eyelid towards the side.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And then pierce the inner part of the eyelid where the hairs are placed with a spatula which is inserted into the tear duct from above; and then extract the pus and place tiny pieces of cotton or cloth underneath the eyelid, and then sign on the eyelid with a tent, and let it be like the shape of a myrtle leaf.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	But indeed let the shape be according to the amount of swelling of the eyelid, for this varies among people; for some require a large amount to be inserted into the eyelid according to the amount by which the eyelid is softened.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And then pierce with the spatula over the two lines which you have marked, and start from the tear duct which goes from the larger to the smaller tear duct.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your incision is close to the natural hairs as it is the thickness of the king's finger.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And then insert the needle into one of the two corners of the ulcer, and then remove all the scabs, and then use sutures with gum or fine wool to attach the two lips together, and wipe away the blood, and let what overflows from the hairs be adhered onto the two eyebrows by some cause, if you wish to do so; but if not, do not heal it.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And then let the suture of the hairs be for three or four days, and then heal it.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you wish, remove the bandage after the suturing, and heal the ulcer with something which dries it out and constricts it, for the eyelid is raised by the sealing of the bandage and the gathering of pus; but suturing is better. And so I have said the ways of tactinir.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	But indeed let there be diligence on the patient, and it is a good operation, and there is no fear in it.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And there is another way in tactinir, and it is that you mark on the eyelid like a myrtle leaf, and then lift the eyelid with three curved hooks gathered together according to this shape:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	But if it is not possible to do this, and the eye is not swollen, then take a needle in which there is thread and place it in the middle of the figure, and insert the other hook close to the tear duct from above, and use your fingers to gather the hairs evenly, and then with these lift up your hand with an even elevation, and lift up all the ulcer over which you have marked as we have recommended.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then attach the two lips of the wound with sutures, and heal it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	But if a scab forms after your incision or fissure, then heal that scab with ointment and something similar to it, and with unguent.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And sometimes the hairs of the eyelid are converted towards it; therefore use in that what we have said about incision; but suturing is more natural.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	Tactinir with cannulas is according to this form:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	And it is that you lift up the eyelid and split the figure which is inside according to what has been described; and then with skill make two cannulas or two thin rods of which their length is according to the length of the eyelid and their width is less than the width of the spatula.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have already split at the ends of some parts where you hold the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	And then gather each one with subtlety under what overflows from the eyelid of the eye, and tighten the cannulas at some parts with strong pressure, and let it be for several days, for the eyelid by the pressure will die and become black and drop out so that a new one comes in its place.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	But if it is delayed, then break the scab with tweezers, and then heal the wound until it is healed.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	And so when it is solidified, the eyelid is raised and the hairs do not pierce.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the way of two cannulas which you make according to this form:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and have the quantity of length and width neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	Of elevation of warts on the face use the needle when the wart is hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When they are non-natural, hard and rough warts on the face, then the operation is that you take a fine needle and place it in that vein of the cedar very gently, and then that you tie off its ends very gently.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And let the length of the threads be as much as one palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And then you put another fine thread beneath it quickly, and tie off its ends if you wish to.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And then let the patient hold his head in your hand, and be in the sun so that your work is revealed, because it is a subtle operation and delicate.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And then insert the needle into the root of the hair which has need of skill, and make it penetrate the eyelid hurriedly while you pull upwards that which is above the natural hair.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And then pull the hair up and out, and insert it into the ointment, and let there be one or two or three hairs, but not more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And then pull your hand away so that the hair is plucked out with the ointment on the eyelid by the natural hair.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	But if it is pulled out with the ointment and not the hair, pull the ointment to the sides beneath by the thread which you have applied to it, so that in being pulled ointment comes out from above.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And you will see it on the face, because then you will pull out ointment and thread, and each and every one will close up and heal the face, and leave the slits for two or three days so that the hair can adhere to its place and grow back good flesh there.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if it is shorter, then you take a long hair from the natural hairs and elevate it with that, or you put in something to lengthen it, and then you elevate it.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter .xiii.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	Of the cure for a wart that comes on the eyelid above.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When it comes on the eyelid and is caused by contraction of the eyelid when it is drawn up to either side, from bad setting or division or cauterization, and is called leporina, and this wart is either natural or accidental, and is caused by setting of plasma or divisions or cauterization, or similar to them badly cured.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The way of the operation on it is that you split that setting and separate its lips, and put in between them a thread of linen cloth, and tie those so that they may be healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And do not believe that you cure it of the causes which dry it out and cause constriction; because if you do that it will return worse than ever before.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use on it of causes that soften like fenugreek, and broths in which are cooked aniseed and fennel seed, or ointment of diaquilon, which is liquefied with some of the oils, and immerse in it the thread, and cure with it.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the secret of your cure is that you pierce with all skill which is not consolidated according to its shape at the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation which we have said, is nothing but a rectification of ehalixacrati which does not return the shape of the place according to what it was before.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter .xiiii.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	Of the cure for a wart that comes on the eyelid below.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This alxacrati which is made on the eyelid below, and is properly named alxacrati; and it is either natural or accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	But accidental is caused by plasma or division or cauterization, or similar.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	And the way of operating on it is that you take a needle which has a double thread, and put that in the flesh, and let it pass from the tear duct on the left into the tear duct on the right, so that the thread comes out at both ends of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	And then extend the flesh to either side with the needle and push it in with the needle, and stitch it up with wide stitches.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And so if it returns the shape of the eyelid according to how it was before, that is good; and if not, take a needle and put it in the split figure, and with that convert the eyelid, and split both slits on the sides of the eyelid below.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And let the ends of both slits be two angles of the incision, which you have made so that they meet, and let an angle be made between them when they meet.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is Greek letter: the line.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And then stitch up that flesh by the amount which is the side of it below of it, that which draws up the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then stitch up the separated parts and sew them with thread of wool; and then cure those with what we have said of the softening medicines and of the ointments so that it is healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if alxacrati comes from division or cauterization, then you must split with a flat split over the hairs of the eyelid as it was before.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And then separate with the blade between two lips as we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the summary of the speech of the cure for alxacrati when it is above or below, that it runs through operation, according to how it is prepared in the shape of alxacrati, and it is in the shape of many different shapes.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the wise artisans always prepare skill in every way which is possible for it so that it returns the figure to the natural shape, or near to it, and that ill person according to how it convices him of the operation and of the instruments in the best dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter .xv.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	Of the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this setting happens to many people in which the eyelid is more set above than the eyeball, and is prohibited from the facility of movement and of its natural works, then you insert the outer edge below the eyelid, and elevate it up there, or extend it with the finger.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And then you insert the adhesion with thin blade, which is not sharp at the edges, hold it bluntly so that the ill person is not troubled after operation, and keep the blade so that it does not scratch the eye with its edge.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And let your incision split that adhesion with facility so that the eyelid is returned according to its natural shape, and all the adhesion be healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And then you put in the eye salted water with which you wash it, or distil in it of zunia dissolved in water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And then separate between the eyelid and the eyeball with blade of li, and put over the eyeball wool infused in white of egg, and on third day use causes of consolidation so that it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter .xvi.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	Of incision of nail and of prominence of flesh of the tear ducts.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Know that ungla is according to two ways, because it is nervous, and is like hard ciphac, thin and subtle; or it is non-nervous, like white hardness congealed, which when the iron touches it, or it is forced in it, it takes on a color, or it is abscinded and the iron is not placed in it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both the kinds do not begin unless from the tear duct which goes little by little that covers the sight and prohibits light and movement of eyeball.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	The manner of operating at the eye is that the patient places his head in your lap, and you open his eyelids, and elevate the eyelid with your hand, and you gather up the eyelash with forceps after making several incisions and extend it upwards.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	Then take a needle and insert into it a horsehair or ox hair or similar, or a strong piece of gut, doubling over the end of the needle slightly and pushing it through the lash, and ligate the lash with gut; then extend it upwards, and scrape away at the side of the lash which is obscuring the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And so you follow this up with the hair into the back of the eye.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And then you incision the rest of the membrane in the root of the tear duct with a fine spatula or small forceps, and cut away the flesh of the natural tear duct so that through this incision there will be no continuous flow of tears.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And sometimes the lash is just extended with forceps or gut as we have said, and then it is scraped away with a lion’s spatula; this is its form.
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And sometimes it is doubled over with gut alone, and sometimes with forceps; a lion’s spatula does this, and if you cannot ligate the lash with gut, make the ligature of the lash with strong gut; and sometimes it is ligated with gut alone. And be careful that with the spatula you do not touch the cornea and that there be no rupture in it, and that the pupil is perforated.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Then after the incision, throw into the eye a little salt or a medicine made of vinegar and let it remain for another day; then wash out that medicine with water so that it may heal.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the lash is not nervous and you cannot put in the needle, or it is not pierced with the forceps, then this type of lash is cured with medicines, and it is healed like this when the eye is divided.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to incision it, then open up the eyelid of the patient and take a fine lion’s spatula with its point sharpened according to this form:
am subtilitat.	And draw the spatula towards the root of the tear duct by which the flow of tears is drawn; and sometimes it is cut with the spatula and sometimes it is cut with forceps.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if you find that it is rarefied and drawn into the root, then distill from your eye medicine made of vinegar or red wine or salt mixed with water, and cover up the eyelid for another day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat the operation until everything is healed, otherwise a wound cautery will be in the eyelid; therefore you open it up and cure the wound from its beginning until it is healed.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat your operation over that with reason until it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The membrane of the tear duct, if it is seen in the eye from great injury, is to be suspended with forceps; and you incision that one part, and do not finish the incision so that there is no flow of tears.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And then distill into the tear duct red wine and vinegar until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter .xvii.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	Of the operation of the other at the root of the tear duct.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Sometimes in the eyelids of algus there is born red flesh and it is raised up so that it covers the pupil, or it approaches or presses upon the eyelids, and strongly compresses the eyelids to the outer edges and it is attached as though to a stone ball.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	But the operation on it is that the patient places his head in your lap and you open up its eyelids and gather up all that flesh with convenient forceps for that purpose, and you hold onto that with a forcep or basket; then you incision the flesh at its beginning so that all is finished with the incision instrument, and be careful of the eye that you do not injure it after your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And it is your incision with which you incision those or with the spatula which we have recommended in the incision of the lash, or with small forceps with which the lash is gathered according to how it comes; consult that chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	So when your incision is completed and all that flesh is healed up, then fill the eye with salt mixed with water or red powder and similar things from the corrosive medicines; place over it a cloth which has been soaked in warm vinegar until it is certain there will be no wound cautery.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if for some cause of algus there is blood cautery and you fear wound cautery, then open up the eye and cure that wound cautery with medicine which yields to that wound cautery; and repeat your operation on it until it is healed; similarly do with the flesh which has occurred in the eye of this type.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	But you must guard against all cure of the eye with an instrument either naturally or accidentally; work with iron and do not put your hand into any of these operations until you see that member has suffered that operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter .xviii.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	Of gathering up of the membrane in the eye.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Red veins which are tested upon the eye and forbid its operation; they reveal the eye with length of days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore it is necessary at the beginning that you consider if the eye in which there is membrane is strong and in it there is not some other disease than membrane; then you gather up that membrane.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And you command the patient to place his head in your lap and then suspend those veins with one forceps or two according to your prudence; that forceps is of fine doubling over according to this form.
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	Or by two forceps graded into the body according to this form:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And then let the veins be gathered up with fine forceps, with subtlety, and wipe away the blood from time to time as you see those veins drawn into the eye and turned over; and when they are drawn in and turned over.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And be careful that you do not injure the eye with the end of the spatula; and if your operation is in the middle of the day in front of the sun, and keep firm in your operation so that you incision only those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have completed it then you distill into the eye red wine or vinegar so that with its sharpness it corroses that which is drawn in from the membrane.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	But if that is not possible for you to gather up all in that hour then you plaster it all with what yields the pain of it; and let it be for several days until the pain of it is assuaged and there is certain no wound cautery will occur.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat over it according to how the mother way is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the form of the forceps:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter .xix.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	Of the operation of the patient to the tear duct by accident.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you cure arisati with cautery or sharp medicine according to how it is preceded and is not healed, then there is no pus in it except that you split over the wound following its maturity and draw out all the moisture which is in it and the puss which is under the bone so that it is uncovered.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And when the bone is uncovered and you see in it corruption or blackness then you scrape it with an instrument of which this is the form.
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And it is named the aspere cap, and let it be made of iron, and the cap round in such a way as a thistle which is made punctured by puncturing with lime or with aliskalfati by subtle puncturing (as it is in the following form).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And place that on the rotten place of the bone, and roll that between your fingers gently, and press your hand gently while you know that that corruption is smooth.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And let it be done several times, and restore the place with causes drying and astringent.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	So if the place is consolidated and there is good flesh born in it, and the body has been cleansed of the pus and stayed for 40 days, and nothing new happens in it nor accident, then you know that it is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And if not, then it is not in it healing but reduce the fissure to the form of the nose, and according to this way: you must uncover according to bone with iron or acute medicine, and when the bone is uncovered, then you take tribe according to this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	Let the tip of it be triangular, and the shank of it be first extended into the extremity thus as thistle.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	And place that on the bone, and let it be close to the lacrimal; lengthen your hand a little from the hole, and roll your hand with the tribe so that it penetrates all the bones, and he feels the patient for pain where the wind comes out of him when you put your hand.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	So then restore the place with medicines astringent drying as it is to you.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	So when the flesh and the place are hardened, then the matter which poured into the parts of the foramen returns to the nose, therefore the pus is lighter on the patient.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter .20.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	Of reduction of the eminence of the hole.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the hole eminences with its totality and does not happen in the wound damage nor diminution, then you see that the patient relaxes, and then he follows, and then you put wind in his neck after scarification and suck well; and then place over the hole liniment which is made of pitch and aloe and enses and sarcocolla, and then strengthen the bandage over the hole with words powder.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the way of the powders is that you take clothes of lion hair mots, and each cloth be doubled into four folds; and make from those mots.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And then place those one over another according to the quantity by which it has the hole necessary.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And then strengthen over those with tough cloth with strong stricture; and iterate the ventouses with sucking without scarification; and stop the ventouses and let the hole tight during the day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	But if in between the ligament is softened, then see that it be loose motion.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And then stop the liament close during the day and night thus as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that the hole has been reduced, well is, and if not, then iterate the bandage with the powders and the stricture and the ventouses so that it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter .21.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	Of the beginning of the eminence of the tunica uvea.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When disruption in the tunica uvea, and then it is eminent and processes out the eyelids thus as a grain of sand, and the shape of man for that, and you want to insert it, then the operation in it is thus as we have recommended, that you insert the needle into the root of the uvea from the part below to the part above, and then put the needle another which is thread double of the part of the lacrimal, and make that penetrate and let the first needle according to its disposition; and then insert the place of the thread double and lift with it the part of the uvea in the circuit of the needle, and strengthen that motion.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	And then extract the needle and place over the hole wool infused in white of egg and let it so that the thread falls with the uvea.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then cure the hole with that which comforts that while the wound is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And several times gather from all part with circle of cloth between the hole adjust eminence great, and then be perforated by the spatium subtle which comes to the preon of the hole, and run the humidity albuginous, and descend the hole and as much.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen so that it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter .22.
De curacio de alconati.	Of cure of hawkness.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This illness which is called hawkness is not but sickness that is settled in the hole like water descending and it is not that.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	But the way of working in it is that you make the patient sit on the seat equipped and straight, and then take his head between your hands of two parts and hold that so that he sees the sickness come to the parts below, and then let be dried and do not descend, and let be obstructed the light, and the patient see the causes thus as he saw.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not go down, know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	But if it is not prepared the descent to the sickness with that which we have said, then make the patient sit between your hands and then take spatium subtle and fen over that on the panniculus cernent a little from the continuacion of the conjunctiva by the tunica cornea in the corona (between the hole wet), so that it be driven out the sickness.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	So when it is driven out, then you distill in the hole water tail in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have boiled fenugreek and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then let it be cured by the other causes so that it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter .23.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	Of the cure of the water descending from the hole.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already said the spices of the water in the division and which conviene to pierce with sermo declaring, then that according to the health.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Then see that you make sit the patient between your hands over a table and lie his hole up, it motion stringing.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And then place close to the eyelid of the his hole your left hand, if the hole in which is the water is the left hole; or with your right hand, if the hole is the right.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And then with your right hand take almaghda, if the hole is left; or with your left hand, if the hole is right.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And then place the tip of almaghda close to the corona by the thickness of the edge in the white of the hole of party of the minor lacrimal, and then pull almaghda with force and roll your hand with that.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And then penetrate in the white of the hole and feel that almaghda is already come to veined cause.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And see that is the measurement of the path of almaghda to the preon the measurement of the space which is of the pupil between to the end of the darkness, and it is the corona of the hole; where you will see with that pupil with the vision of the hole by the clarity of the tunica cornea.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And then place almaghda into the hole in which it is the water, and then you pull it down a little and another, and therefore if the water goes down as much, then see the patient that over which hole he breaks his view as much, and almaghda in his hole.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And then rest a little; therefore if the water is descended, then you rest that another little before almaghda be driven out.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And then when it is dried and do not go down, then you extract almaghda with facility, and roll your hand a little by a little, and then dissolve in the water a little of salt clear of gemma and with that wash the hole within; and then place outside the hole cot or stop or wool infused in oil roasted and white of egg and tongue over that the hole.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	May God and those of our time place upon him a veil of oblivion.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if you do not obey your soul by following the path of truth because of its hardness – for there are some people who are hard-wired to be resistant to truth – then consider using Alberite, which has this composition:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And so you pierce that joint and do not stop your hand from going deeper into the wound, and only stop when you reach the affected area beneath it.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	Then insert the suppository as described above.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And when you have finished your work, prepare the patient's bed by making it lower to the ground in a dark room, and make sure he is prohibited from any movements.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And place something in his nature that will soothe it, and do not hurt his head on the right or left side at all.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And let there be lamentation according to his disposition on the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And then untie him in that dark room and reveal the truth to him, and make him see some causes, and return the lamentation within seven days.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And do not do this during the hours of healing or immediately after the infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	You must then remove him from there so that the water can gently and quickly return to normal.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	But if a boil occurs, then you must untie the wound on the seventh day and rectify it with something that soothes the boil.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Then you must reveal his truth to him and place an oral charm on his face so that he may be ruled by it for several days while he exists in the dark room.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And let there be lamentation as he gradually descends and converses about his causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And know that in some instances the disciple of vision is not excused from certain views, and then you must be ardent about the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And now it has reached us from some of those who are in the Artach , and some say that they make fire in Ayrac by punching a hole through which water is sucked out.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	But nevertheless I have not seen this done in our land, nor is it described in any of the ancient books; and it may be a novelty.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of the species of Magdaam for those who ignore them:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And they are made from wood or iron specifically, and their ends are with this triangular subtlety, the acute end thus with that is the shape.
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter XXIV.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	On the healing of a wound in the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When diverse meats are swollen in the nose, of which there is some cause that is connected to a scropion sting or to a polyps stone; and this ailment is called polypus because it resembles that stone represented.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And from it is cancerous meat, scaly, of dusky color; and from it is that is not leonine meat of dusky color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	And so in that which is not leonine meat nor cancerous, you must make the patient sweat between your hands and place him in the sun, and open his nostrils, and prick his testicles into those meats.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And then extract that to the ends of the foramen, and you must insert something that you have understood from those with a sharp instrument at one end so that you know that all the meat is removed; if something remains in him from any cause for which abscission is possible, then you rate it with one of the subtle instruments with ease so that nothing remains.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	But if it is seething with blood or there occurs a boil, then you place on him that which you must; or if they are malignant boils, then you cut and cauterize them so that the blood is shed and all the holes are completely exposed.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And let there be spitting in the nose, with a mixture of vinegar and water or wine.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	But if the nose is open and from it proceeds humidity into the palate, then know that he is healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	But if the humidity does not penetrate according to how it should, then you know that within him is meat gone in the nostrils of which there has been no abscission.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	And so then you must insert gall into him from which there is some thickness, and you see in him that there are pusy bones of the nostrils to which there has been no abscission; and let there be spitting in him of words with an accent on the first or last syllable, and insert between each nut the quantity of the finger or less, and put the patient to sleep and insert one end of the gall into his nostrils with a ray or another cause for which it is possible.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And having done this, let him throw his odorant into the canals of his nostrils so that it reaches the back of his throat, and let him spit onto his forehead, for appearances are like those of children at school, and is a light cause to him who wants to do this.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	And then insert the two ends of the gall, one end which hangs over the nose and the other which is inserted in the nose, and administer a clamp of meat with the nostrils that are on the gall, and do this so that you know that the meats are at the nostrils of the gall.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	And then extract the gall and place in the nose the abstraction of blood a wooden plug , and do this for three days or more so that the fluid corrodes all that is from the meats.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And then at the end of the cause, place in the nose a lead pipe for several days so that he is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	But if you see that there is no improvement, use that.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the instrument to clean out the nose with which oils and medicines are distilled in the nostrils:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And do this from silver or wood, which is like a small open lamp, also with a small cone, and the meat similarly.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you want, make a closed tube like a cane, and the end of the instrument to clean out the nose and let it be flat, uncovered; to which you apply at his back, with which you have that when you heat in him oil or that which you want from the sucking and from the causes.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And these are the expensive capipurges: you receive from beaver fat, white tallow, ginger, long pepper, saffron, black pepper, spikenard, and henna. You mix it with the juice of sorrel and kale, and let there be pills made from it, and let a pill be mixed with water tebezia, and let it be applied to the nostrils of the patient lying on his back.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	Of the eels in the ends of the nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Many times it is seen that there is a growth of an eel in the ends of the nose, and it swells and increases over several days so that it receives its guardant.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And for this you must insert it into his coming of his appearance, and remove all of that.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	And then place over the area a cautery or burning medicine that is in the location of him.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	But if its abscission is delayed so that it swells, consider then if it is hard, dusky in color and of little feeling, do not touch that with iron because there is an ulcerous boil; for many times this happens to one who inserts that.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the boil is leonine and not dusky in color, and there is an abscission possible in all of it, then you must withdraw the patient and insert that without fear, and heal the area with something that comes out of it and constrict it so that he is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	Of the suturing of the nose, and of the lips, and of the ears when the continuity is dissolved by plague or similar.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	Know that when there is a dissolution of continuity in one of these cartilages, there is little to be done in that operation except in some men.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when for some cause or other, you find that it is a fresh plague with its blood, then you should bring together the two lips of the plague with a suture, and then cure that inside so that it may heal.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the lips of the dissolution of continuity are already separated, and each is made healthy, then you should cut off each part of its cord until that it bleeds.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then join the two lips with a suture and strengthen those, and over that pulverize dragon's blood and finely ground herbs, and place over the powder a piece of a diafinicon plaster or one of the other consolidative plasters, and leave it there for two or three days, and then remove that plaster and change the plaster and let it stay there so that the wound may heal by itself, and then cure with ointment until it is healthy.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	But the manner of the suture is that you make the dissolution of continuity either with needles as we have recommended in the suture of the belly, or make the dissolution of continuity with a thread as we have said before and let us know.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	Of the extraction of those causes that come in the two lips on the inside of the parts.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Many times, in many men in the inside of their lips there are certain hard pustules that resemble err-grass, and some of them are smaller and some are larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Therefore you should turn the lips inside out and cut each of those hardnesses from all sides, and then close up the incision with finely ground sage so that the blood is constricted, and then wash it with wine vinegar and cure the area with something astringent until it is healthy.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	Of incision of the flesh joined to the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Frequently there is on the gum a piece of flesh which the ancients called albuginea, and so when you suspend that with an instrument or with your fingers and cut it away from its root, let the pus run out or the blood.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	And then place over the area finely ground sage or other astringent or cauterizing powders.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if that flesh returns, then cut it away again secondarily, and cauterize it, for the cautery will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	Of removal of teeth with a file.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When in the surface of the teeth of the inside of the parts and of the foramen and between the gums are attached rough, sharp scales, and sometimes they are blackened and are made yellow or green, and corrupt the gum and make the teeth loose.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And so you should make a cut between your fingers and place the head of it in your mouth, and rub the teeth where those scales appear and the causes like sand until no cause remains from them, and that makes the blackness and the yellowing and the others go away so that they are cleansed.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	And if that is what is at the beginning of the root, then it is good; and if not, then you should do the cutting over those again on the second or third day until it comes to the final state in whatever you want.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And know that teeth have need of many different types and figures of tools according to how your operation is prepared.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And therefore the file with which the tooth is filed from the inside of the part is another type of file than that with which it is filed between the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of files you should prepare them as follows:
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter 30.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	Of extraction of teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	You should cure the tooth of its pain with every trick and delay in completely extracting it, for there is no cause that exceeds the usual one when it is extracted, for it is a sublime substance that causes an excuse in its extraction.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	But when the tooth is forced to be extracted, you should certainly be certain which is the painful tooth, for many times the pain deceives the patient and seems to be in a healthy tooth, and then you extract that one and the pain does not cease until the painful tooth is extracted, for we have seen this through the operation of the barbarians.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Therefore when you are certain which is the painful tooth and know it, then you should scarify in the circuit of the tooth with a spatulum on which there is some virtue so that it is dissolved from the tooth into the gum from all sides, and then draw it with tweezers or with subtle forceps bit by bit until you extract it.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And then press it strongly with great forceps for good speech or strong grip, and place the head of the patient between your thighs so that he does not move, and then draw the tooth according to rectitude in a way that you do not break it or give the patient greater pain.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And if it is not loose, then take one of those instruments and place it below it from all sides with ease and force the extraction of it just as it was done at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	But if the tooth is broken or rotten, then you should fill that crack with cloth and tighten it with the end of a fine wire so that it is not broken at the time of your constriction on it with forceps.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And you should open sufficiently with scarification in the circuit of all parts of the gum and guard your strength so that you do not break it and let the wound come apart from it, and return to the patient because of the malice so that his first pain is less.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And beware that you do not do what some ignorant barbers do in their haste and audacity about the extraction of them, for they do not administer what we have recommended; for many times they bring great illnesses on men which are difficult to extract, and their roots are all wrinkled, or some of them, or that you draw it with some bones from the jaw just as we have often witnessed.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And then the extraction of it should be washed in the mouth with wine vinegar or wine with salt.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if it flows with blood afterwards, then grind some amount of alum and sprinkled over the wound, and if that alum does not work, cauterize.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The form of the forceps and tweezers with which the tooth is drawn at the beginning should be of long length, short handle and thick, so that they are not bent when you work with them.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And let them also be of thick handle within so that when you stretch them with those they are not bent, let them be short lengths.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And let them be made of iron of India drawn to a point with straight edges, and in the edges of those there are teeth of which some enter into others and stretch by strong constriction, and sometimes the edges of those are the shape of a goose beak which is hooked, it is bent, and they are of strong constriction.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	Of extraction of teeth and of drawing the bones from the jaws that are bitten.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you need to extract a tooth that is broken for some reason, then you should put over the affected area a poultice for one or two days until the area becomes soft; and then insert tweezers or tongs whose ends are shaped like the beak of a bird called stork or pliers, the shape of forceps:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The ends of them should be made inside as if they were a file or an axe.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if you do not obey me in this use of forceps or tongs, then you should cut through the gum and uncover all the flesh and insert the tool that is called "crown", it's a small lever whose shape is as follows:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And let its tip be broad and not pointed so that it does not break.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	Thus if through this the gum is torn away, it is good; and if not, use these other tools of which these are the shapes: the shape of the first tool is triangular at its end in which there should be some thickness:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The shape of the second tool is that it has a triangular and very thin end.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And you will be helped by this tool having two prongs, of which this is the shape, namely the following:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	and other instruments which are used in tooth extraction; for this is done with this tool which is like a large hook, and this is its shape:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	of the triangular end bent or short, which should have some thickness, and not be pointed so that it does not break.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And another thing is that the instruments for moving teeth are similar to the other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	But the wise and skillful practitioner in this art finds for himself many methods according to the operations and various diseases; for there are diseases of which the ancients did not speak nor prescribe any proper instruments, because of the forms of the different species.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the bone of the jaw or of the other bones in the mouth is broken, or if it is dislocated, then there should be applied to it at its place a weight convenient for the instruments and forceps which we have mentioned in the extraction of tooth roots, and use the tool whose form is as follows:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And let there be some thickness put on it little by little, and let it be bound or held with the mouth so that it does not evade or flee until the bone is completely soft; then restore the place with appropriate medicines for this purpose.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if there is a slight dislocation in the bone, then cut away that dislocation and its blackness, and cure that until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter .xxxii.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	Of the cure of teeth that are prominent above the others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When teeth are prominent not according to their natural form, and especially when this is the case for women, and especially for old women; then you must consider: if a tooth is next to another tooth, and it is not possible to cut it or file it, then pull that tooth out; but if it is not next to another tooth, then you insert that tooth with this tool whose form is as follows; it is like a pig's snout, and should be made of Indian iron with a pointed end.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And you must insert it in such a way that the tooth is inserted into it in two or three days because of the hardness of the tooth, and that no other teeth are affected.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is a prominent tooth exposed to filing, then file that tooth with an Indian-iron file whose form is as follows:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And let it all be of Indian iron, and its edge sharp; and let it have fine points as with the file with which needles are made, and with which the tooth is filed little by little in several days with ease, so that no other teeth are affected or cut.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	Then smooth it out at its end, and cut away any blackness with a razor blade.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if a tooth whose side is broken and which hurts the tongue, then you must file it so that the edge of that fracture is blunted and smoothed, and flattened so that the tongue is not hurt nor speech impaired.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter .xxxiii.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	Of restoring broken teeth with gold or silver wire.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When teeth have received concussion and loosening through a blow or through falling, and the patient cannot chew on that side, and you have cured it with astringent medicines, and your cure has not been effective, then so that they do not loosen, there should be inserted in them gold wire and not silver wire, for silver will bend and after a few days will dislodge, but gold will remain firm.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And let the wire be of such thinness and thickness according to the quantity that can enter between the teeth; and the form of the binding is that you take the wire and pass it between two healthy teeth, and then let it grow with two curves of the wire between two broken ones, or if one or more, so that the thread comes to the healthy tooth on the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	Then tighten the binding at the end from which you began, and strengthen your work with ease and skill so that it is not broken.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And let your binding be such that by which you bind the wire so that it does not come out.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	Then insert the ends of the wire with forceps or tongs, and apply them in each place with tools, and fold them and conceal them between the healthy tooth and the broken one, so that they do not harm the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	Then let it be bound as tightly as possible.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	But if it is loose or broken, then tighten it or those with another wire in the same way all the time.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the form of teeth and the figure of the binding of two healthy teeth and two broken ones, bound thus as follows:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when you cause one tooth or two to return by their fall to their places, and they are grown back as we have recommended, and are broken again:
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	Then let not this be done except by wise practitioners.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And sometimes it is fitting because of some cause of the bones of cows, and it is made like a tooth in shape, and is placed in its place where the tooth failed, and is bound as we have said, and remains and serves with him for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter .xxxiv.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	Of the cutting of the thread that comes in the tongue and prohibits speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This thread which appears under the tongue some times by nature or accidentally and occurs through a wound that has already healed.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation in it is that you open the patient's mouth, and lay his jaw bone aside; and lift up his tongue, and then insert that nerve thread according to its width so that the tongue is loosened from its binding.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	But if in it there is any hardness or knotting, and this exists because of a healing from a wound, then you cut it with a sharp instrument and split that according to its width so that you have cut the thread and the knotting is dissolved.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And beware lest there be made a crack in the bone flesh, and you split up here the hard part of the bone and blood flows out.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	Then let it be washed with the dregs of wine or with vinegar, or with water in which there has been ground pepper; and then keep the tongue pressed down with a cloth, so that the patient does not speak again until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	But if there is bleeding, place powdered vitriol on the spot; but if blood comes out, then cauterize the spot with a lanolin cautery that is suitable for this purpose.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that wound with the other remedies until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	On the extraction of a ranula under the tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Sometimes an abscess forms under the tongue, resembling a small lump, which hinders the tongue from performing its natural functions, and it grows larger as it fills the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the operation on it is to open the patient's mouth facing the sun and examine the abscess.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you see it is dark colored or black, hard, and the patient feels no pain when you touch it, then do not touch that spot because it is a ulcerous sore.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it is inclined towards whiteness, and moist, then you should put the needle into it, and pierce it all around; and if blood comes out in the process of your operation, then you must place powdered vitriol on it to stop the bleeding.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then return to your work until you have finished it, and wash the wound with sharp wine and salt; and treat that wound with other remedies for this purpose until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter 36.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	On the extraction of an abscess from the ear, and of that which occurs in the gutter, and of other abscesses.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When an abscess occurs in the ear canal due to an obstruction of blood in the hollow of the temple; and if blood does not come out from it, then you should appeal to Podragua and pierce it with a cautery of powdered vitriol.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	But if it is of a reddish color and the root is thick, then do not touch it with iron due to the flow of blood; before it has ripened, either you will draw it out or it will rupture on its own.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is of a white color, soft, and the root is thin, then that should be pierced.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the operation on it is to examine, before your operation, whether the abscess has rested completely or has diminished at all; and then make the patient face the sun, with his head turned towards you, open his mouth, and the servant press the tongue down with his fingers as shown in this figure:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And it should be made of silver or bronze, and be thin with a pointy tip.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	Then, when you press the tongue with that instrument and see the abscess before you, place your finger on it and pierce it with the needle, drawing it outwards as far as you can.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Another method is to pierce one of the membrane layers; and then cut that with an instrument as shown in this figure:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	It is like forceps, except that its ends are curved, so that the openings of each pair are facing each other, very sharp, and should be made of iron tempered in vinegar.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	But if this instrument is not available to you, then pierce it with a needle as shown in this figure: The needle should be sharp on one side and blunt on the other.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And when you have pierced one spot, pierce the other according to this method, and then the patient should rinse their mouth with warm water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if blood comes out, then rinse with water infused with the peel of a pomegranate or a bay leaf, or with something similar to what is used for stiptiqua wounds, so that the flow of blood is stopped; and then treat that wound until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And sometimes other abscesses occur in the ear canal besides those of the ears, and they are examined as mentioned in the examination of two spots equally.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And I have treated a woman with an abscess that occurred in her ear canal; the abscess was of a dark color and there was little pain, and it had closed her ear canal, and the woman could only breathe with difficulty, and she had prohibited herself from eating and drinking water, and she was nearing death if she did not drink water for one or two days.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the abscess had swollen so much that it had formed two bumps for two months before they discharged.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	So I treated her thoroughly and placed one of my needles in one of the bumps, and drew it out, and when I pulled it, a large portion came out; and then I examined that spot where I understood the other bump to be, and then I opened her mouth, pressed her tongue, and then I placed the needle in that abscess.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And then I cut out a large piece from it, and there was only a little blood.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	So that woman's ear canal was completely closed, and she began to drink water immediately, and then she ate food; therefore I did not cease piercing that abscess many times for a long time, and the abscess occurred in the same spot where it had been prolonged.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	And then I made an incision and cauterized the vein of him, therefore until now; and then I walked around and did not know what God had done to me at that moment.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Here is the next sentence:
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	Of the beginning of the ulcer when it is puffed up.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When there is catarrh in the ulcer, and it is puffed up and long, then it is called a furuncle; and if it is thick and round at the beginning, then it is called a boil.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	But if it is healed by the water that we have said in the division, and does not agree with your treatment, and you see that the pustule is closed up from it and is subtle, then cover over that which is rounded off; and if it is of that length, and is bloody, of a dusky color or black, and there is no sensation to it, then cover over its incision, for in that is fear over the patient.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you see it according to the manner that I have said of its whiteness and length, then make the patient fast and press his tongue with an instrument with which process its form, and fix the needle in the new one, and draw that one down and incision that with one of two instruments, whichever is said in the incision of two melons.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And cover over that one unless it is adjusted on the natural term without addition, for if you incision more of it, you will cut his speaking.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And on the incision, use what we have recommended in the incision of two melons, and heal that within until it is well.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the patient is terrified by the incision of it, use in having in the cauterization of it without fear, and the manner of the cautery in it is only with acute water, and it is that you place the head of the patient in your hand, and press his tongue with the instrument which we have said, and draw from the water which we have said in the chapter on cauterization, and apply with that cause while alive, and pause that not thick nor subtle, and of that fill the concavity of the instrument of which this is the form:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	Let the extremity of it be concavity in which is placed the medicine as well as the concavity of a spoon, and place the instrument with the medicine over the ulcer; and let the patient jaw over his side so that flow saliva or mucilage of the mouth of that one through the intriscus medicine, so that descend from that any cause upon the vein of it and that it leads that.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And on your hand with the medicine, and squeeze that over the uvula through the space of about an hour until you see that be blackened and subdued by the biting of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you wish, take a thread and wrap that around the extremity of the vein, and submerge the thread in the medicine, and insert the vein with the thread into a tube of above until the thread adheres in that tube, and do that as many times until you accomplish what you want of the cauterization of the ulcer, and then let it be because it will dry up and fall off after three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that the medicine needs to be repeated, repeat that, and after the cauterization, wash off in the circuit of the ulcer with a thread dipped in beer, and cleanse with that which is in the circuit of it from the medicine, and let it be washed with water rubbed, and be cured outside with embrocation, and inside with ointments until it is well.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this species of treatment is more safe than incision and more long of fear.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Sometimes the uvula is healed by what is more subtle than cautery and incision, for it is healed by sub-smoking in this manner: take calamus, hyssop, origanum, ruda, scichos arabic, camomile, borage and resembling those of the herbs, and adjust all those causes, or some of them, in a wave, and let them be submerged with wine vinegar, and boil; and let the wave be well-luted with decent wax, and let there be in the middle part of the wave a tunnel, on which is paused an instrument made of silver or of iron.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And let the extremity be inserted into the mouth of the patient so that the steam may rise to the uvula over the pharynx, until the uvula is very obscured.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And on that repeat many times until it is dry, and beware so that you do not make this treatment at the beginning of the aliment of pustules, for it would press too much on the pustule, and it is not good that you do that, but wait for the declaration of the pustule to be cauterized.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	But if that instrument is not present to you, then take a reed and attach on the extremity of it a hollow of horn, so that the mouth of the patient be scorched, for the hollow of the horn prohibits the steam from scorching the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this treatment is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Here is the next sentence:
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	Of extraction of thorns and of what adheres in the vein and of the other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Many times adheres in the vein or thorn of a foot or some other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Then cover what of those is apparent, on which falls the sight, more than you press the tongue with instrument in front of the eye, so that to you be declared what is in the throat.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And what is not apparent and is hidden in the vein, then make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, for strongly the annexed cause draws the vein out through vomiting; or let the patient swallow a piece of bread or a piece of lettuce or a bone of dry bread; or take a piece of sponge marine rock, and rub that firmly with gall, and then the patient swallows that, for it passes to the place in which are thorns and is extracted.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And more take an eel and be with gall bound, and let it be inside mouth and sopped out be extracted; or take a pig and sop out the inside and sop out the outside in it.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	But if they are not extracted with those causes which we have said, then use of an instrument of lead according to this form:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And let it be thicker than a little needle, and in the extremity of it be concavity which you insert into his throat with ease.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And let him lift his head up, and beware of the touching of his bones of the throat, so that it enters to him vein or the thorn, or that the doctor with his hand.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	But however, that the patient who inserts it is better, by his knowledge of the place of the annexed cause and presses down below, and draws his hand up with the instrument on him, all that according to the quantity which is prepared in him until it is extracted.
Capitol .xxxix.	Here is the next sentence:
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	Of extraction of blood-sucking annexed to the vein.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When it is bled with what we have said in the division of the treatment with medicines and does not agree, then consider in the vein of the patient on the forehead, for you will have compressed the tongue of him with the instrument which we have recommended.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Then if you see the blood-sucking, extract that with a small needle or with thin threads decently.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not possible for you to extract it, then take a hollow cane and insert it into the anus of the patient, and place in the cavity of the cane a hot iron, and do this as many times (while the blood flows out and is stopped from the anus) and abstain from giving the patient water all day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	Then take a cloth full of water and work the mouth with it, and wash the mouth with it; and do not let him swallow any of it for any reason, and wipe his mouth with your hand from time to time as the blood flows out when he feels the water.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	But if it is not removed with what we have described, then smoke the anus with cumin or assafetida using the instrument which we have described in the suffumigation of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do this, so that he may pass it.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And there is another way of operating on it in the suffumigation, which is that you take an egg in which are hot coals and the egg be covered with a cover in the middle of which is a hole, and the end of the instrument be fitted into that hole; and then let the suffumigation go through, and place the anus over the end of the cane, and close his mouth so that the suffumigation is not lost until you know that the suffumigation has reached the blood, for the blood will soon flow out.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if it does not come out, then repeat the suffumigation many times, and abstain from drinking, and eat salty food and garlic, and do not drink water, and by this method it must be driven out.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the form of the instrument by which blood is extracted from the anus when it is seen; and it is similar to tongs except that there is some curvature in it:
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	which is placed on the anus and its end is like the beak of a stork, which is broad, in which there is a hole, because, when we press for any reason, it does not slip out.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter 40.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which is the sum of the speech in the opening of sores and their cutting.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	The sores are many species, of many manners, according to which I remember them, each one in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they are diverse in their piercing and cutting by two manners, of which one is by the species of sores in themselves; and by that we take from moisture.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second manner is according to the places in which they occur, for the sore that occurs on the head is different from that which occurs on the buttocks; and the sore that occurs on a fleshy place is different from that which occurs on a joint; and each one of them has its play by operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And there are some sores which only need to be成熟了sania in those or filling of them.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	And there are other sores which need to be cut when they are crossed, and not mature according to their filling, such as sores that are near joints, for when a sore occurs near a joint, its nature is prolonged while it presses what is in the circuit of it, and strengthens the ligaments or nerves of that joint, so that there is a cause of contraction of that member; or it is near a principal member, and if you delay its piercing until it has become mature it injures the principal member; or it is near the buttocks, then pierce it before it matures; and do not cut it cruelly, because of incomplete digestion, but cut it near the buttocks so that it does not burst the part within the buttocks and is elongated to the parts inside the buttocks, and a fistula is formed, or it occurs in the end of it that it is not healed.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	But you should know the time of the piercing of the sore, and this is when it has matured.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And you should know that it has matured when there is a decrease in the pain and the cessation of fever, and also the decrease in heat and pulse, and the sharpness of the head of the sore, and the other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And because you should know that the piercing happens in the place closest to the bottom of the sore and from pus coming from the healing of the eminence.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And the piercing should always be through the length of the flesh or body, if the sores are in the parts of the hands or feet, and in the places of the tendons of the nerves, and the strings; and at last, in all equal places where there is no reflection; for in those where it is reflected, use piercing according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	But when the sore is on a fleshy place, then it is better that you pierce it before the digestion of it is confirmed according to its filling, as we have said; for if you pierce it before this, the part within it is prolonged and great dirt, and the lips of it are hardened and its depth.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	But some sores are pierced according to the breadth of the flesh or body, depending on the necessity, or according to that by which the member suffers.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And you should administer a small piercing in small sores, and in large sores a great piercing and a wide one or many piercings according to the diversity of the size of the sores.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And there are some sores in which the vein is hollowed out and has been cut, when it has been done so that bread and made is in a term that it already is, as well as that which occurs in pimples and blisters.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And there are some that are cut with three angles; and there is one in which it is cut like the shape of a bay leaf of myrtle, as well as the sores of the angles.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And there are some in which round cutting and lunar cutting is administered, and they are like those.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	But that one to which there is no head as are superficial sores, you should pierce that with superficial piercing, or flat only.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And when the sore is large and has collected a lot of sanies, pierce it and do not be afraid to extract all of its pus in that hour; take out some part from it, and then close the sore for another day, and then take out a larger part, and do this many times according to graduation until it is healed.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	And especially if the patient is of a cold nature, or female, or child, or old in decrepitude, for the animal spirit is often resolved by the exit of sanies, and often the patient dies, so you operate them.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	But keep this chapter with great caution, and then your piercing when you pierce these sores, cleanse the plagues and consider therefore if the plague of the sore is little, or it is a flat section, then you administer oil of lye or old wine; and if the sore is large and the fissures of the piercing are many, then you should stop wax in each hole so that it comes to points.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if in the sore a part of the vein is cut or hollowed out around it, then you should complete it with old wine or linen thread made of linen, as well as when you have drawn out pans or roots, because of its moisture; and strengthen that within the third day; and then process it and heal it by what means, so that it comes to points.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	But if bleeding occurs in the hour of your operation, then you should administer warm water and wine mixed with linen, and place that over the place of the bleeding many times.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	But if the flow of blood continues, then you should administer remedies and treatments, and apply powders as I have recommended in many places in this book and in its divisions.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	But if it is in the winter time, and the location of the ulcer is in a place with many nerves, then you should mix powders with wine and hot oil, and apply those to the areas.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is in the summer, and the locations are fleshy, then you should apply powders mixed with water and oil or wine and oil, and keep that applied for three days as we have said, and then you should open the ulcer and clean it and administer to it what is suitable for its healing.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And this is what is necessary to know about the cure for ulcers generally, but according to the method of distinction I have already said something about every type of ulcer in a particular way.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter 41.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	On the section on ulcers that come in the skin of the head.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the skin of the head there are small ulcers that contain small nodes made of tissues that belong to them ; and their tissues are made of many things.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And from them there are bumps, and from those are contained moisture similar to lime.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And from those are the ones that contain moisture like powder, and they look alike  and from those are the ones that are hard and lapidea-like.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the section of all of them, and in the extraction of those there is no fear, even if you must extract them it will not cause an artery to be cut.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation in the section of those is that you probe those with an instrument the form of which you will see below, so long as you know what it contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	For if what is contained is moisture, then you should cut that according to its length through a superficial section according to this form:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And you should begin the section from line .B. to line .G. Therefore when the moisture is evacuated, then you should scrape that area where that moisture was contained, and you shouldn't leave any cause of all of it there, for if any remains return, they will be caused by something else.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	Then you should immerse the wound in Egyptian ointment if available, and if not, then in water and salt  and fill that up with that, and leave it for another day, for by doing that you will soften all that is rotted of that skin.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	Then you should repeat the application of Egyptian ointment on that wound second and third time if necessary, so long as you are sure that there is no cause of that rotted skin remaining  then treat the wound with ointment until it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if an ulcer contains a fatty node, then you should cut into that according to this form:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	with a cross-shaped section, and cut between the two lips of the section and slice that in every part, and use your strength in extracting the membrane which contains that.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	But if an artery causes you trouble, then do what I told you before.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And similarly do in the case of a lapsified ulcer with section and treatment according to what we have said  and a section on a lapsified ulcer is less painful, for it has little blood and little moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And sometimes some of these ulcers in the head are found in some people in which there is not moisture  and the cause of that is when someone hits an ulcer on the head of an old woman and find the ulcer like hard, rough, white stone which could not be pierced, and if someone hits it, it bleeds.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	But in other accidental ulcers in the head, this is not the case, as in the ulcers that come to the heads of children due to teething, and the cause of them are the teeth  but the section of all these should be a superficial section.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And make the piercing of those from their lower parts so that the body can be separated from the sanies in their lower parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	Then treat those with what is suitable for their cure.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 42.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	On the section of scrofulas that occur in the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	Many times these ulcers occur in the neck and armpits and angles  and sometimes they appear in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that occur in the neck, and many are engendered among them  and every scrofula of those is within its own membrane, and thus with the nodes and ulcers of the head, as we have recommended.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	And the tissues of these scrofulas are many, for some of those are lapsified, and others contain moisture, and still others are malignant and don't obey cure.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Therefore in that which you see good disposition in the Touchment, of which the color of what is manifest is close to the color of the skin, and is not swollen in any part, and is not annexed by the nerve of the neck or veins or artery, and is not profound  then you should probe that with a superficial section from above to below from the line .G. between the lines .B., and scrape that off of every part, and cut between its two lips with an incision, or with many incisions if you have need of them, as we have said in the ulcers of the head, and extract it little by little.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is more careful that a vein or nerve not be cut.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And be careful that your hand not slip when you cut, or else it will hurt the patient, and cut what is not necessary to cut  for if you cut a vein or artery and prohibited from your operation, then apply on the wound vitriol ground or other powders which stop flow of blood, and bind the wound tightly, and leave that until the acuteness of the ulcer subsides and the wound softens and begins to be suppurated.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the blood is cut.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Then return to your operation until you have completed it.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And then inquire with your finger if there is any cause of the other small scrofulas, therefore cut those and clean them.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it is in the root of the great scrofula vein, then you should not cut that scrofula from its roots.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	But before you must lie that down with strong folded cloth and let it be so that it falls by itself without causing harm.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	Then fill the wound with old wine which you have already mixed with Egyptian ointment  then treat that.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you cut that scrofula completely, then you should bring the two lips of the wound together and bind them so tightly that there is no superfluous discharge.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	But if you see that there is superfluous discharge due to the size of the scrofula, then you should understand how to cut its root  and open it up and treat that with suture and what is said.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And those of the scrofulas that contain moisture, pierce that with superficial piercing where it appears to you as the site of its maturation, and pause piercing of what is drawn from the bottom of the body, as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	Then treat that with piercing, cauteries with ointment and similarly to those  so that it softens what is rotted from the corruption.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	Then when you see the wound already cleaned, then treat that with ointment of generative flesh so that it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 43.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	Of the incision of the lump of the apothema accidentally within the throat.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	The ancients described this incision in the epiglottis, and I have not seen anyone in our land who has performed it.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of the speech of those men:
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	But in men who have squint, whoever performs the extraction of the epiglottis, by which all the veins and the main ones of the patient are here, should be avoided.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	But in those who have apothemas in the mouth or throat or two ears, when the malady is not in the windpipe, one should use the incision of the epiglottis to avoid the loss that is caused by puncturing.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore when we want to do this, we should cut the epiglottis below three circles of the circles of the epiglottis or four with a small incision for the width in that one which is between two circles for quantity, and the incision should be in the pharynx not in the cartilage, and that place is suitable for incision because it is deprived of flesh and its blood vessels are light.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor is fearful, then he should extend the throat with an instrument and cut the membrane until he reaches the windpipe, but avoid the blood vessels if for some reason he sees any of them.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	Then cut the membrane according to what we have recommended; and it is signified about the incision of the windpipe by the flame which goes out from that which is split in two, and also by the breathlessness.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And let the wound remain open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Therefore when the time has passed in which piercing is feared, bring together two lips of the wound's membrane and sew that alone to the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	Then administer medicines which cause the flesh within to grow so that it may heal.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And Albucasis says that the sum of the speech which we have recommended is that some of those apothemas have oppressed the throat of the patient and the patient has died within, and his breath has become weak, and some want to cut the epiglottis so that the patient may breathe over the wound by some respiration, and be saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And for that he commands to leave the wound open until the wickedness of the malady is consumed; and its wickedness lasts three days; and then he commands to sew up the wound and heal that which is within.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And that which I have seen by my servants is that a servant placed a stick and touched it in his throat and cut with it a part of the windpipe of the lungs, and he was called to heal him, and he found the breath just as it is breathed by the dead, and he discovered the wound and found the blood which had flowed from the wound small.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Then he confessed that he had not cut any vein or nerve and the breath came out from the wound and he healed that which was within so that it may be healed by fire.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And he did not listen to the servant unless he vomited in his mouth, and after some days he returned to the healing of his own dispositions.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	Now he says that in the incision of the epiglottis there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 44.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	Of the incision on apothema which occurs in the external throat and is called a hernia of the throat.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This apothema named hernia of the throat is a large apothema according to the color of the body, and it occurs in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it occurs in two ways, for it is either natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And the natural one has no remedy.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental one is according to two ways, for one of which is like grassy nodes and the other way is like apothema which is caused by constriction of an artery, and in that one there is fear.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And let no one make presumption with him unless with an iron needle except in that one which is small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you probe him and examine him with the needle, and if you find it like a grassy node and not suspended by any of the veins, then you cut that one just as the nodes, and extract that from which the skin and membrane; but if not, then scrape all his being, and heal the place with that which is suitable for healing.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 45.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	Of the incision of the species of nodes.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	There are many species of nodes and I have already said all of their species in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And let him who tells you the difference between a node and an exitura with doubt.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Therefore I say that with exitura there is heat and fever and violent pains until the ebullition of the superfluity ceases; and putrefaction is completed when the fever, pain, and heat cease.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	But with a node there is no heat or fever or pain, and count that phlegmonic lion which is in the own bag.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And it is according to the color of the body, and its beginning is with a ulcer and it occurs thus with a pustule, whether major or minor, and they are according to two species for one is grassy and contains humidity, and the colors of humidity are many, as I described in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Therefore when you come to the healing of a node, probe that and examine that at its beginning with an instrument which is called intromes according to what its form comes in the chapter which is nearby.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And it is the manner of inquiry of apothemas and of all nodes, and it is that you take this instrument and insert that into the most humid place which you find in the apothema, and you turn your fingers with that little by little until you know that the instrument has penetrated the membrane.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	Then close your hand according to the measure of the size of the apothema, and extract the intromes and consider that which is flow out in its trail.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the humid matter flows out, of whatever color it is, then you cut that superficially just as I said in the other apothemas.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if from the trail of the intromes you do not get out humidity, then know that it is grassy.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And dry over it with incision having the form of crosses according to this form:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	just as you taught him, and suspend that with hooks, and scrape the membrane from all parts with ease, and guard the skin or bag over that if you can, and extract that pus from the node.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	But if it is torn in the operation, it is not possible to extract that pus and many times there, then you extract it at intervals until from it nothing leaks out for any cause.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	Because if from it no leak out anything for any cause, little or much, the node returns according to the may.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that from it leaks out a little part, then complete the wound with some strong corrosive powders and close the wound, and pause over that which apothema cauterized, and heal that by another cure until it is healed.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if it is a large node then you cut the two lips of it and heal that which is flesh.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	But if the vein is contrary to it, or not pulsating, then you close and cover the place of zegi trissat which is vetriol and let that lie there for two days or three until its pus becomes thin and the boil of the blood; then return to cut that which is swollen of the node.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	Of the forms of necessary instruments in incision and piercing.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Those are of three kinds: there is the large one, the moderate one and the small one.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of the large instrument is as follows:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of the moderate instrument is this:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of the small instrument is thus:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	They should be made of iron, or bronze, with sharp edges, in order that the instrument can enter into the abscesses smoothly.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are the forms of the instruments of experience, and they are called 'albered', and one of them is named 'berid'.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And they are of three kinds: there is the large one, the moderate one and the small one.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of the large instrument is as follows:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of the moderate instrument, its form is:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of the small instrument, its form is:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	It is convenient that they be used for abscesses and openings and fistulas and boils, both when they are caused by bones and other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And they should be made round and large, like a lion's tooth, with which the membranes are sewn together, and they should be made of copper, or iron, or silver; and the best ones are when they are made of copper.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And they make instruments of black feather, which are used to open up fistulas in the cavities where they are reflected and their reflections are seen by those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And they are of three kinds: there is the long one, and the moderate one, and the short one; according to the size of the fistula and its narrowness.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	The form of the large instrument made of lead:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	The form of the moderate instrument made of lead:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	The form of the small instrument made of lead:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of the hooks are of many kinds; some are simple, with only one curve, and they are of three kinds: large, small and moderate.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And their bodies are hooked, and they are of three kinds.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And some of them have two curves, and they are of three kinds.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And some of them have three curves, and they are of three kinds.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all of these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	The form of the simple hook which is large, its form is:
Forma de unci simple migier:	The form of the simple hook which is moderate:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	The form of the simple hook which is small, its form is:
Forma de unci orp gran:	The form of the hooked instrument with a large body:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	The form of the hooked instrument with a moderate body, its form is:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	The form of the hooked instrument with a small body, its form is:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	The form of the hook which is large and has two curves:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	The form of the hook which is moderate and has two curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	The form of the hook which is small and has two curves:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	The form of the hook which is large and has three curves:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	The form of the hook which is moderate and has three curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	The form of the hook which is small and has three curves.
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the forms of the knives with which they cut and scrape the knots and abscesses; and they are of three kinds: there is the large one, the moderate one and the small one.
Forma de scapel gran:	The form of the large knife:
Forma del scapel migier:	The form of the moderate knife:
Forma de scapel pauc:	The form of the small knife:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The edges of those with which incision is made are sharp and the other edges are not sharp; and they should not be handled in such a way that the edge cuts into the vein or nerve, but so that it is done gently on the surface of the abscess to promote healing by burning which promotes healing of the abscess.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the forms of the probes, and they are of three kinds: large, moderate and small, like wolves.
La forma de magda gran:	The form of the large probe:
Forma de magda migier:	The form of the moderate probe:
Forma de magda pauc:	The form of the small probe.
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	They should be made of iron and they should be similar to a tooth with which it is done hollow.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And at the tip it should be pointed with a hidden spike and in the other part it should be flat, both inside and outside, according to your will, likewise.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of the sponges which are hidden between the fingers for piercing abscesses and not perceived by the patients, and they are of three kinds: large, moderate and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are their forms:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of the syringes with which the flow of blood is stopped, and they are of three kinds; large, moderate and small; their forms are:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	They should be made of copper, round with no length, and fine.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And if these species of syringes are large, moderate or small, then through them stop the flow of blood quickly in necessity; and sometimes when at first there is no medicine.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	But do not use them to stop the flow of blood in every part of the body; and do not use them except in fleshy parts, likewise in the joints of the arms and legs, and in the armpits, and in the groins, and in the groin and breast and abdomen, and like to the joints of the flesh.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And some of the instruments are made small like knives for cutting veins or for incision of an artery or of a vein.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And some are made round thus:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	Of the cure of the breasts of men who are like women.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some men's breasts are swollen due to sleepiness like women, and then the breasts are inflated, and they are like women's breasts, and they are Roman.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if one who eats it, let him cut that according to the lunar incision from line .B. to line .G., and then remove the whole groove, and fill the wound with medicine, and then join the two lips of the wound with a stitch, and cure it.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the breast sags to the sides and is softened by its weight likewise with women, then it is split into two parts like a figure of the moon, each part contained in the other according to the form from line .B. to line .G.; and then remove the cod, and the pus, and administer what has been said about the stitch and the powders which is necessary in the cure until it is healed.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not complete the incision of that which you must cut due to the unease of the patient, and due to the flow of blood, then fill the wound with cotton saturated in a corrosive ointment and lay it in that which corrodes like rust, and then cure it.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	Of piercing of abscesses which come from below the titties.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	The abscesses which come from below the titties are of the species of scrofulas, hard, they contain one pimple which is loose.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And some of them contain moisture; and some of them are punctured with lunar incision thus: from line .G. to line .B.; and when the pus is completely evacuated from the abscess of the scrofula, then you fill it with oil of the veil and lay it in the other next day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And let the wound be treated with a suitable ointment until it heals.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the abscess of the lymph nodes and scrofula is, then you should split it as we have said in the section on scrofula.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	If the plague has spread so that it causes pus, then administer cauterization as we have previously mentioned.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	Of the incision of abscesses that occur through an artery or vein.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	And the signs by which inflammation and abscess are known to be through an artery or vein: for when the abscess is through an artery, it is long drawn out in the body; and when you press on the abscess with your fingers, you feel a pulsing in it.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And that which is through a vein is round at its appearance in the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And an incision on this abscess is dangerous, especially in that which is below the armpits, and in the elbows, and in the neck, and in many places of the body; and it is very great, therefore its cure by cauterization should be avoided, and also that which is in the extremities or the head.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	But on that which is above due to inflammation of the opening of the artery, make an incision in the vein along its length; and then open up the incision with tweezers, and free the artery from the membranes so that it may be exposed.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And then put a needle into it and make it penetrate to the other side, and constrict the artery with a double thread in two places, — which will cause you to see that in extraction of two arteries which are in the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And then plug up the place between two membranes with spongy material so that the blood will all flow out of it and the abscess be dissolved.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then administer a cure in which pus is engendered until the membranes fall away, and then cure it with suitable ointments until it heals.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if the abscess is through an incision of a vein, then you should hold that which is by your hand to the abscess with the vein, and then thrust in the needle below the place which you have held by your hand, and make it penetrate; and have in it double thread so that you may extract it from the other side, and then tie off the abscess with good membrane according as I have said to you about the ligature of two parts with two extremities of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	But if you fear that you will pull out the thread, then put in the thread with that needle below all of the abscess down to the incision of the first needle, and constrict your threads in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Then dry up the abscess in its middle so that when it has come out of it, then you pierce the superfluity of the vein and leave that which is tied to it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then put on it powder which you have soaked in wine and oil, and then administer the cure which is made with cauteries and ointments until it heals.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Chapter 50 of the abscess which occurs from a twisting of nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	So too abscess occurs in an artery and vein, and similarly abscess occurs in nerves when they occur with a blow or occur from excess heat, and similarly.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And it is made in the places of the assistants or the leg, or in any place in which the joints are bruised.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And it is a heavy abscess, and it is like the color of the rest of the body, and in its greatest part there are no pulsations from it, and when it is pressed with strength, the patient feels a stupor in it.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And it is not an abscess drawn out in the body, and therefore it is below the vein, and it is bruised all over and does not go before or behind.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore that which is in the joints should not be cauterized with a hot iron, for it would quickly bring about contraction.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	But that which is in the head or forehead open up the vein with spongy material.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	But if it is a minor abscess, then cut it with scissors and dig out its roots.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is great, then suspend it with a hook and gouge out that, and then stop the bleeding; and tie off the wound with a suture, and cure it until it heals.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 51.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	Of the incision of the abscess which occurs from a hernia that occurs in the belly.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	And it occurs in some men many times in bellies and other parts of the bodies of those who are called funguals because of their likeness to mushrooms, the roots of which are subtle and their heads are large; and already their lips are conversed, and they are small, and they are great.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I have seen one, and in his belly were two tumors which were like mushroom-like, and there was no difference between those white ones, of fine roots.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And already the lips of those were inverted and split, and moisture ran from it all the time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Therefore I cut into them and probed in at the one in feet, 15 inches. and the other 6 inches.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And the operation at its incision is that you consider whether the patient is cold, and the color of the wound is white, moist, with subtle roots; then you open it up with spongy material, and let it be cauterized in the fire, for many times pus is expelled from it after its incision; and if the blood comes out, cauterize it.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if the patient is fearful and nervous, beware of an incision with a hot iron; but then take a recently made thread of lead, and constrict that wound, in the manner which I have said; and leave it for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	And then tie off in the constriction of the lead wire; therefore do not cease to tighten the large lead wire on the tumor until it has been dug out and has fallen away by itself.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	But if the tumor is of coarse roots, then in its incision there is some cause of fear and terror, and especially in that which is in the belly.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	But it is possible that you cut into its matrix, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And then cure it until the wound is healed.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And beware that you do not presume to cut into a tumor which is of dusky color, of little feeling, of light weight, for such a one is an abscessed cancer.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And I will come again with remembrance of cancer, apropos.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 52.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	Of the cure of preeminence of the navel.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	Preeminence of the navel is caused by many things; or by fissures in the septum which is over the belly, and there are from it the membrane or hernia according to what comes before in other ruptures; or by blood which flows out of a vein or artery as was said before, or by constricted distention within it.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	But if it is by a fissure of the septum and by splitting of the membrane, then the color of the abscess is like that of the body; and there are in it pains, and then appears in various positions.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it is by extrusion of the hernia, then its positions are like that which we have recounted, in more violent diversity, and when you press it with your fingers it is concealed, and then returns; and it is strong within it, and is great due to the entry of foments and vehement work.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	But if due to humidity it is slippery and not hidden when you touch it with your hand, nor is it constricted or stuck.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it is due to blood, then these signs will appear as the ulcer turns black.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	But if it is due to flesh, then the ulcer is heavy, large and hard, and it feels like a certain quantity.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	But if it is due to windiness, then the touch of it is slippery.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation on it is that you consider whether the protruding navel is due to an arterial or venous wound, or due to windiness; then you must abstain from treating it, for in that place there is fear and danger as I have taught you in the chapter where I said about ulcers from arteries and veins.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the navel's protrusion is due to the intestine or hernia, then you must command the patient to hold his breath and be standing upright; and then sign with your finger around the entire navel, and then command him to breathe in while you hold your hand over his chest, and then gently push the hernia back in with a strong ligature or a bandage, and the way of binding decently.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And then open the middle of the extended ulcer over the hernia and put your finger into that opening and seek out the intestine; and if you have caught it or held it by the ligament, then pull it out gently and push the intestine back inside the belly.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you've caught the hernia, then take that by the inch; and cut off the excess of it.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	But if it is against your artery or vein, then surround that spot, and then return to your operation; and take two needles and put on them strong threads and insert the two needles into the circuit which you have made around the ulcer in the way of a cross, making the needles penetrate; and then tighten the ulcer in four places over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you want, take out the needles and let the extended flesh fall back and heal by itself; or insert into it what is subtle and healing, and then treat that spot with what is suitable for the wound to heal.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the navel's protrusion is due to flesh in it or humidity, then you must hollow out the ulcer as we have said and extract the blood or humidity which you find in it, and then treat that spot with what is suitable for it to be consolidated.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 53.
De curacio de cranc.	Of the cure of hernia.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have already said, in the division, of the kind of hernia and in what manner there is a way to its cure by medicines, and that it is cured in it by iron without being ulcerated; and we have said that hernia is engendered in the mother and cautery of its cure.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And the ancients said that sometimes hernia is in a place where its removal is possible, like hernia in the breasts or in the groin and to those similar members allocated to be extracted entirely, especially when it is started small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	But when it is old and large, you must not approach it, for I have not seen that ulcer healed nor have I seen anyone else do so.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation on it is when it is allocated as we have said, is that you precede and let the patient fast and purge black bile sometimes, and then cut that spot if a manifest fullness is found.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And then prepare the patient with a preparation in which he is located for operation, and then insert nails into the wound which are suited to that spot; and then hollow out every part with a good sharp saw without breaking any cause of the roots of it.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	Let the blood flow, and do not bandage that loosely, and express the spots, and wipe away the thick blood with your hand or an instrument by which it is possible for you of instruments.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if it does you harm from thick blood flowing from an artery or vein, then cauterize that spot until the flow of blood stops, and then treat that spot with the other cure until it is healed.
Capitol .liv.	Chapter 54.
De curacio de ydropici.	Of the cure of hydrocephalus.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already recommended, in the division, of the kinds of hydrocephalus from water and the signs of each kind, of its cure by medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And that which is cured by iron is only the kind of althitas alone, and it is not approached by iron to the kind of timpanistes or to the kind of yposarcha, for that is deadly.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have treated this kind of hydrocephalus timpanistre with medicines and your treatment does not work, then consider, for if the patient has already achieved weakness or is suffering from another malady or hydrocephalus, like that which is in the head or chest and similar to those, then beware that you do not treat it with iron, for there is danger over that.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	But if you see the patient suffering from vertigo profuse, and in him there is no other malady but hydrocephalus only, and neither child nor old person, then the manner of its operation is that you raise the patient between your hands, and then press his belly with your hand, filling the water to the part below the navel, and then take a pointed spatula according to this form:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	It is of two pointed parts long, of acute end as spatula; but indeed it has in it some brevity little by little, so that in the operation with that you do not pass into the intestine, and that you lead that.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And then consider if the generation of hydrocephalus is from parts of the intestines, for then you must with the section lengthen the navel to the quantity of three fingers to the parts below, in the right of it over the navel.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	But if the generation of hydrocephalus is from malady of the liver, then your section is left of the navel for three fingers.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if its generation is from the bile, then your section is on the right.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And beware that your section is over the side over which the patient wants to lie so that the excess does not flow to that spot.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And then pierce with the instrument all the way through, and insert into that section, and raise your hand with the spatula between the navel and the hypochondrium, and you express that; and if it is the quantity of a fingernail or finger width.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And then pierce the hypochondrium so that the spatula reaches the place it wants to go, and it is the location of the water.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then extract that and insert an instrument of which this is the form:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	And it is similar to a subtle silver cannula; it is made of silver or brass or lead wire, and at the lower end of it there are two small holes: one from one side and one from the other side; and its end is split according to the manner of a feather, like this:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And at the upper end of it there is a ring, for when the instrument reaches the water, then that immediately slides over the instrument, therefore emptying from the water in the hour small quantity, for if you empty from that more than that does not befell in the hour, strongly harm the patient by resolution of his animal spirit, or accideth to him death which is approaching.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	Now evacuate him according to the amount of his strength and according to what you know about the disposition of his sickness, the strength of his pulse, and his overall health.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	Then remove the instrument and retain the water which causes it; as soon as it is retained by the cord, which holds the wound over the head of which you are told to pierce, according to that manner.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And then repeat the instrument on another day if the patient can tolerate it, and extract a small amount of water, and do this for several days out of caution, and beware of error until the water is hardly flowing at all.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	But if you are concerned about the patient and leave out a great deal of water, then treat that wound with quicklime in sand, move it in a bath, and expose it to the sun for a long time; and treat that with drying medicines until it is healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And cauterize the stomach and the meld, and the vein from which the water is extracted, according to what I have recounted in that which precedes.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter 55.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	Of the treatment of children who are born with a hernia in the urinary tract.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Sometimes, some children are born from their mother's womb and the top of their head is not broken through (or it is a narrow crack or it is in its proper place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Thus, treat it with a break right after it is born with a very subtle move according to this form:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And then put into the crack a thin lead nail and tie it there, and leave it for three days or for .iiii.tre.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when he wants to urinate, let him be milked and urinate; and then return that.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not put in the lead, then it is possible that the urine which goes over the place will not harm this closure.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	But he whose crack is narrow should be treated with a lead nail as we have said for several days until it is enlarged.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	But he who is born and the crack is not in its proper place, it has been cut, which is the cause because from him, that which is born and the crack is at the end of the head of the penis so that he cannot urinate inside, while he raises the penis with his hand to the parts above; and there is no generation for him, because the sperm cannot reach the mother according to nature, and it is a very bad disease.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	And the manner of the operation on him is that the patient be laid on his back, and then stretch the head of his penis with your left hand with a strong extraction, and push in the head of the head of the penis at the foreskin with a pointed object, as one pricks with a feather, or that you scratch any part so that the skin of the penis comes to resemble the head of the penis and that the crack falls into the appropriate location according to nature.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And beware that in your operation there is no bleeding, for many times it happens; and give to him what you have used to stop the bleeding, and cure the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter 56.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	Of whitlow which happens in the foreskin on the head of the penis and of corruption, and blackness, and adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Many times this whitlow happens in the penis and is an excess of flesh.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And one of them is malignant and the other is not.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	Not-malignant, that you suspend with a very thin thread and cut it off so that that whole part is removed; and then put on that cut area a suppository of Egyptian ointment; and then that will cure itself with the ointment of diafinicon until it is healed.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the whitlow is malignant, of a light color, then you should administer cauterization at its edge and its root.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	But if the whitlow is in the foreskin of the head of the penis and it is not circumcised, and one part of the whitlow is inside the foreskin and the other part is outside, then you should bring out the whitlow from its beginning so that it is exposed; and then you cure that exposed part, for when you cure the foreskin itself, it is not certain that it will not return.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And indeed, sometimes it happens in the testes and in the foreskin blackness and corruption, then you should remove all that which is blackened and which wants to become corrupted or that which is already corrupted; and then spread over that with ointment, which is ground with flour of the shell of pomegranates and of husks beaten and strained.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And then cure that with the other treatment until it is healed.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	But if there is bleeding, then administer lunar cauterization according to this form:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	for the cautery of juice is good for two things at once, that is for bleeding and for the wound when it is corrupted.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the penis is腐 and destroyed all at once, then you should insert into the foreskin a lead cannula so that the patient can urinate through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adhesion of the foreskin with the head of the penis (and this adhesion does not happen except in him whose foreskin is cut, and on him circumcision is not performed; and when it happens by plague or by pustule) let you open it with a blunt object so that the ligament is dissolved and the head of the penis is released from all parts.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to tear them apart, then you should cut with a pointed object some part of the head of the penis and of the foreskin; and so it is because the foreskin, when it is thin, easily pierces the penis through its thinness.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And then separate the foreskin from the head of the penis with a very thin membrane, which is already moistened in the water that was rubbed so that they do not adhere again.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And then let it be cured with green vitriol until it is consolidated.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter 57.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	Of the purification of children and of the treatment of what happens to those who are circumcised.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a cure for continence like other diseases: but however, since it is of our operation and of our will, and it comes from that more naturally in children, it is necessary that we assign to it better operation and use the easier way and lose the more difficult one for health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore we say that the ancients did not use circumcision in some of their free ones, because they did not use it in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired it through experience, the cause of which is that I have proven the majority of the artificers and of the barbers using circumcision and purification with a knife and with torches; and they use cement for the seal and incision with the nail.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And I have already proved all these ways and found better purification with forceps, with cement at the seal that is made with the nail in purification with the nail, because many times the membrane of the foreskin comes above, because the membrane of the foreskin has two tunics, and the thick one below, and it is very easily forced to another incision and secure pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And in purification which is done with the tweezers, and it is digital, of which the surgeons use, it is not secure to make an incision at the end of the virile member, for it often goes into the hollow of it.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	But in operation with the nail, very often iron and corruption are caused by your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the umbilical cord of a child is short by nature, and in many cases is cut in such a way that it does not require cleaning, and I have seen this myself.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	But about the cleaning that is done with tweezers and thread using soap, I have discovered through experience and experiment, because the tweezers are of a proportional size, so the sharpness that is above is like the sharpness that is below; and therefore when you press your fingers in proportionate ways, and insert them according to a comparison at one time; and compression is made of the thread with the shape containing the umbilical cord entirely cut through, with which there can be no error at all.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the way of the first operation is that you make the child stay mostly upright if it is one of those that I understand a little, and do not move but only tie the thread in its umbilical cord as much as you can, and leave it until the next day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	Then do that which will make him happy in every way that is possible for you to do so as one who receives his understanding.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	Then make the child stay between your hands in a prepared manner, and do not be hesitant; and conceal the tweezers in your hand or under your foot so that the child does not see those or any other of the instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	Then insert your hand into the umbilical cord and blow into it, and draw out that which is inside so that the head of the umbilical cord comes out, and then clean that which has accumulated in it as filth.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	Then tie the marked spot with a double thread, and then tie it lower down a little bit with another thread, and then have your fingers ready at the spot of the thread below with good retention, and insert between two threads.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then elevate the umbilical cord gently and stretch out the head of the umbilical cord; then let the blood flow little by little, for it is better that way; and place powder on top of it and over the powder place a cloth in which is spread mulberry gum in rose water mixed with recent olive oil; and leave that on there until the next day; and cure that with ointment until it is healed.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The shape of the tweezers for cleaning, this is their shape:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	Let the ends not be cut and the others be cut, so that the nail is not cut, and let the length of both sides be as long as two handles equally.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	But the mistake in the cleaning is that the umbilical cord intrinsecally entirely escapes or is torn from its insertion.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Then cover that part of it with your finger nail before the insertion of the spot and insert that according to equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, then grab it with a needle and insert it.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	But if it is passed three days and that which is inflated below the umbilical cord remains, then you leave that until the swelling of the aposteme has gone down, and cut it with ease, and insert that according to how you are prepared.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And be careful of the head of the umbilical cord because it will not hurt him.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	Then cure that with what the plague is consolidated by the powders which we have counted in the treatise of powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it is cut from the umbilical cord beyond measure, and obeys the parts above, that will not hurt him.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	But cure that with what we have said before so that it is healed.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter .lviii.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	Of the cure of urine retained in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is made by oppression made by stone or by blood clot, or by tumor or by swelling, and they are similar to those of what we have said about the ways of cure in the division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not dissolved and the retention of it is due to a stone which already is in the neck of the bladder, then have the patient bend over his knees.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	Then press the patient's feet against his back and raise his stomach from the part above his back as far as it is possible for him to do so.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Then the neck of the bladder is constricted and the stone is expelled from the parts behind, because the urine is released.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if it is not dissolved by what we have said and the cause is made more vehement upon the patient, then have him given an extraction of it with an instrument which is called a syringe, of which this is its form: Let it be of silver and let it be thin, as well as the needle of an owl's feather to be thin in length like a long needle, to whose head is a pipe of reed with a thin cane in the shape of a long needle, to which is a pipe of reed with a thin cane in the shape of a long needle, to whose head is a pipe of reed with a thin cane in the shape of a long needle.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the way of the exit of the urine through it is that you take a folded cloth and tie it in the end of it with wool or cotton with good binding; and insert the ends of the cloth into the part below the syringe, and insert it with tweezers if any superfluous cause from the wool, but insert it into the reed with force. And then tighten the syringe with a bowstring and with egg white of an eagle.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And let the patient lie on his back, and open the bladder of him and the umbilical cord with oils, olive oil and eggs.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	Then insert the syringe with ease into the place where it reaches to the root of the umbilical cord; and then bend the umbilical cord above at the part of the embelic; and then grab the syringe in that place; and then grab that until it reaches the bladder, and that which is empty of the cause, and do not do so according to this order, but let the meat go into a tortuosity.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	Then extend the cloth with the wool little by little, because the urine soaks up the wool.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Then pull out that and let the urine be released by cure, and use the syringe; do not cease to do this and use the syringe until the bladder is evacuated and the patient feels better.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter .lix.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	Of quality of catheterization of the bladder with a catheter and with similar instruments which are in accordance with that.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When ulcers or apostemes occur in the bladder, or blood clot in it, or swelling is contracted there, and you want to distill water and medicines into it, then let that be done with an instrument which is called a catheter, and this is its form: Let it be of silver and let the needle be thin, as well as the needle of an owl's feather to be thin in length like a long needle, to whose head is a pipe of reed with a thin cane in the shape of a long needle.
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	But if in its end it is dull, then it is closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that there are three holes: two of the one part, thus alike.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	In the beginning it is a hollow place in which it is inserted, and let there be according to quantity that it pushes out that, its addition, within that when any cause is pulled from the moisture, it is pulled out, and when it is expelled long, according to how the catheter makes naphtha phlegm in sea battles.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	Then when you want to propel moisture into the bladder, insert the end of clapcedra into the moisture and pull it with that which is pushing on the parts above, because the moisture is pulled in the hollows of clapcedra.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	Then insert the end of clapcedra into the umbilical cord according to how we have described in the syringe; and then grab the moisture with what you grab it, because that moisture comes to the bladder as quickly as possible, and the patient feels that.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The form of the subtle crucible through which the bladder is crystallized, and that is its form:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And it should be made of silver or brass, the top part being shaped like a small feather, and from there it narrows into a tube.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	Then take an animal bladder, and place within it the humidity that you want to crystallize in the bladder, and tie that tightly with a strong double ligature, and heat that humidity over a fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	Then insert the tip of the crucible into the urethra.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And then squeeze your hand over the bladder with the humidity inside, tightening it with all your strength as the patient urinates, until that humidity has entered the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	But if you don't have a bladder, then take a piece of parchment and make a circle out of it; and pierce that all around its circumference; and insert a strong needle into those holes, so that it can be rotated; and add the circle as well as the soft part, because when you place it onto what you want of the humidities, oils and waters.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And then you tie that in the instrument and do with it as you did with the bladder, and express with your hand until the humidity enters the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Chapter 60:
De extraccio de peyra.	On the extraction of stones.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already spoken in the division of stones, about their kinds and cure with medicines, and the difference between a stone generated in the kidneys and one generated in the bladder, and their signs.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have spoken of the stone which requires operation with the hand, and incision.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And the stone generated in the bladder properly speaking is that one which is lodged in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And for this we will relate the manifest exposition and abbreviation.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore I say that a stone generated in the bladder mostly comes to infants; and its signs are that the urine which exits from the bladder is like water in its thinness, and appears in it sand; and the patient rubs his penis, and often passes water, and then is relieved; and with this there is formed a lump in those places.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And the cure of children who have reached 14 years is easy; and it is difficult to cure the old.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	But in the young, it is rendered smaller by what is between them.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And if the stone is large and its cure is more difficult, then it is the contrary.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore when we come to the cure of that, we must first cleanse the patient with a crucible which extracts everything in his intestines; because that fissure sometimes blocks the expulsion of the stone through investigation.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And then the patient should be pressed on his feet and coughed and bent over so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, or jumps from one place to another.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And then let him bend his head down between your hands, and let the patient's head be below, so that the whole bladder is made to decline towards what is below.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And then push it out entirely.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	Therefore if you feel the stone in the space, then at once make incision over him.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if it does not at all come out through your touch, then let you anoint with oil the tip of your left index finger on the patient, if he is an infant, or the middle finger if he is a young man, and insert that into his anus.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And push out the stone as it lies below your finger.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And gradually turn that into the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	And then press on it with your finger, and expel that out through the place where you made incision.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And command the assistant to press the bladder with his hand; and command another assistant that with his right hand extend the testes towards what is above, and with his other hand re-open the scrotum which lies below the testes, in the part where incision is made.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then insert a spathule, of which this is its form:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	and cut into him what is between the anus and the testes, not in the middle place, forward to the left side of the scrotum; and let the incision be over that stone, and let your finger be in the anus, and let there be made a transverse incision, so that the incision coming out be ample and its going in be narrow according to the amount of the stone which it is possible for the patient to bear, and not more, because if you press too hard with your finger which is in the anus the stone will burst from within.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And know that there is some stone of which its angles and margins are such that the expulsion from it is difficult because of that.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And of that one is like a onion, and is round, and there is made easier expulsion from it.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	Therefore if the stone has such angles and margins that they fit in the fissure,
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	and if it is not pushed out then let you push on that, or press upon that with decent gestures, the end of which be thus with a file, and do not open from him; or insert below him a slender instrument with a curved end.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	But if you cannot push out that stone, then let you enlarge the wound a little, and if you see blood flowing, bind up that tightly with a band of linen soaked in vinegar.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	But if the stone is more than one, then at the beginning push your hand to the mouth of the bladder, and then insert it there; and then push in a little there; and act likewise as though they were two.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if the stone is very great, then it is not prudent to insert that with a large incision, because it happens to the patient one of two causes: or that he dies, or that he receives into himself a continued distillation of urine, because the place is not entirely consolidated.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	But let the assistant expel it as soon as it is pushed out, or draw it in the fracture of him with tongs so that he draws out that in pieces.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Therefore when you have finished your operation, then fill the wound with gum of aloe and dragon' s blood, and bind that tightly.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And place over that a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in rose oil and water, so that the wound may be healed by cauterization.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	And then let the patient lie on his back, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when that has been loosened, wash the wound with water and oil, and then cure that with ointment of theriac and ointment of diapulmon within so that it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	But if in the wound occurs cauterization, dryness and corrosiveness, and of that there are signs as though the blood is frozen in the bladder and because of it the urination is prohibited (and that is known through the going out of blood with urine), then insert your finger into the wound and expel that blood, for if the bladder is provoked to putrefaction of the bladder and of him.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then wash the wound with wine, water and salt, and let it be bound up with every kind of bandage so that it is healed.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And let there be the hours of all the cure that you lie with both scrotum and bind up the medicines which are laid upon the wound.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the stone is small and lodged in the urethra, and there is urination prohibited, then cure that with what you have already mentioned before there was incision, because forces have been applied for this cure, and it has been proved; and now take a bore of iron wire, of which this is its form:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	of triangular shape, acute, placed in a stick.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	And then take the gall bladder and tie it with a thread under the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And then insert the iron into the stone, piercing it easily with the piercer until the piercer comes out of that stone.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And gradually turn the piercer with your hand in that stone so that you make the piercing of it go in until you make the one on the other side penetrate; for then the urine is immediately expelled.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	And then press your hand on that which is broken of the stone of the exit of the thread, for that is cracked and is pierced by the urine, and the patient is healed.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	But if this cure is not prepared for you for some reason which prohibits it from that, then tie one thread under the stone and another thread above the stone.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And then tighten your hand on the stone between those two threads.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And then pull that out.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	And then untie the thread and clean the congealed blood which is made in the wound.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And it is not necessary to have the thread under the stone except so that it does not return to the bladder, and the other thread above except that when the thread is untied the stone will come out of its place and close the wound.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And for that it is necessary when you tie the thread above to raise the scrotum up or that it returns back with its proper movement and closes the wound as we have said.
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter .lxi.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	Of stone extraction of women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Few stones are generated in women.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	But if you see a stone in any of them, then the cure for it is difficult and is prohibited by many ways.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of them is because the woman is very virgo.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second is that you do not find a woman who knows how to uncover if she had sexual intercourse with a husband or is one of those women who have husbands.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third is that you will not find a woman who knows this art well enough to perform the operation with your hand.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth is that the place of the incision on stones in women is distant from the place of the stone so that it is difficult to cut with a knife and there is fear in that.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	But if necessity forces you to do that, then know that you must take a woman who is well versed in medicine and few are found.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	But if you are deprived of that then seek medicine which is both quick and subtle or present a midwife who is practiced in the affairs of women or a woman who in this art has learned the science.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	So do that presentation and command her to do everything that you tell her from the inquiry about the stone at the beginning; the cause is so that she examines if the woman is a virgin then know that she puts her finger into her vagina and feels for the stone.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	So if she finds it then stop that under her finger and then command her to insert her finger into it.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	But if she is not a virgin then command the midwife to put her finger into the vagina of the patient and feel for the stone for as she puts her left hand over the bladder and press that with good pressure.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	So if she finds it then know that gradually she pulls down that from the orifice of the bladder to the openings below with the sum of her strength so that it comes out at the root of the scrotum.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And then insert the tip of the knife into the orifice of the vagina behind the root of the scrotum from whatever part it is stopped at and fix the stone in that opening so that the finger does not slip on the stone.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the incision should be little at the beginning and then insert the needle into that incision and if she feels the stone then increase the incision according to the amount she knows that the stone is dropped from it.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And know that the species of stones are many for there is a small and large stone and smooth and rough one and long and round and having horns.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	So you know how many species there are of it therefore you indicate about what you want.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you see blood flowing then apply a little vitriol to the place and hold it there for an hour until the blood is dried and then return to your operation until the stone comes out.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And prepare for yourself instruments which are used in the extraction of stones in men so that you are helped by them in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you see blood flowing and know that the emission of blood is from the artery which is cut then you place powder over the place and apply a bandage on it with pressure and do not go further in that; and draw out the stone and do not pull it for the patient will surely die.
E aprop cura la plagua.	And then cure the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	So when the cutting of the blood has stopped then after a few days if the place is healed then return to your operation until the stone comes out.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter lxii.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	Of incision on acute hernia.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	Aqueouz hernie is not but an accumulation of moisture in the white cauldron which is under the scrotum and it is called cauldron.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And some are in the proper skin which nature has prepared it in the orifice of the scrotum so that there is a new scrotum and it is not but an ulcer.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness which happens in the muscles for there is effusion of that matter in those and some happen by beating done on the testicles.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this moisture has many colors for the color of it inclines to yellow or to bloody red or to red or is black and slimy and that is what happens most.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which you know that this accumulation of moisture is so because if it is in the white cauldron then the ulcer is round and declining a little in length like the figure of a scrotum and appears the testicle for the moisture contains it on all sides.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the moisture is in the proper skin then the ulcer is round at the orifice of the scrotum and from this one estimates that it is another scrotum.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the moisture is between the testicles and the white cauldron then cuts are made under it.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And if you want to know the color of the moisture then test the color of the moisture in the ulcer with a thread which has been burned so that its shape is preceded and judge from what comes out of it.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	So when we come to the cure of it with iron then know that command the patient so that he is flebitic if that is possible for you and see the body of him.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And then let it be pressed on his navel for some cause a little and place under it some woolen cloth.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And then put your hand on his left side and command the minister to follow you on his right side and extend his rod at the testicles of the navel to the orifice of the abdomen.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And then take a sharp knife and cut the testicles at their middle part for the length so that it is close to the orifice.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And let the incision be made according to the correct technique, equidistant from the line that separates the skin of the scrotum, until it reaches the white capsule containing the testicle.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	Examine it, and be careful not to cut into it; and let your incision have an opening that is suspended by the more thick and subtle humors, and scrutinize the incision according to the amount that you can.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	Then pierce the capsule full of water with a wide piercing, and extract all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	Then separate the two lips of the incision with your fingers, and extend the capsule upward; do not touch the testicle contained within, and cut into the capsule in whatever manner is possible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And cut into it to its entirety or in parts, and especially its subtle side; for if you do not examine the incision of it closely, there is no certainty that the water will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	But if the humors proceed from outside of its capsule in the moment of your operation, then when you have finished the incision of the capsule, return it inside, and then sew shut the two lips of the scrotum, and heal that just like the other wounds, until it is healed.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you find the humor corrupted by some other illness, then you should tie off the vessels which are over the suspensory ligament, extract the humor, and heal that just as we have said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	But if the water is aggregated into two herniations, then know that there are two hernias; therefore cut into that hernia just as you have done in the other one equally; and if it appears to you to be one operation, then do it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	Then you should cleanse the blood, and insert into the incisions wool which has been dipped in oil or rose-oil; and place outside another wool which you have dipped in wine and oil, and spread that over both testicles and the groin of the belly; and place above it doubled up cloths and powders, and tie those with a bandage which is according to this form:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	and let there be pressed two cloths and they are folded of colored wool according to this semblance; and let the extremities be made with which it is pressed of cotto or of wet wool, and let them be tied with tightness in the band of the undergarments, and one of the extremities take from the buttocks into the groin, and the second take to the part of the armpit, and two extremities over the two thighs and two other extremities over the two ankles, and all the tightness be adjusted in the band of the undergarments.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes this hernia is medicated artificially by cautery instead of incision with an iron; and it is that you take a thin cutlass and that you cut into with that the scrotum of the testicles, and it is ignited according to what we have recommended until the white capsule containing the water is uncovered, and then you take cautery according to this form:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	and it is similar to the Greek letter alpha.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	Then pierce with that capsule, and it is ignited until all the moisture is driven out.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	Then extend the capsule with your fingers, and examine it with your fingers, and examine it with a thin cautery which is ignited; and cut into that just as it is possible for you until you have eradicated all of it; and be careful that the fire does not touch the humor.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And know that this operation is more safe and more distant from bleeding of blood, and better than operation with incision.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	But if it does opposition to you pustule cauterized in the hour of incision or in the hour of cautery, or bleeding of blood, then know that you heal whatever opposition it makes to you by that, with healing which is appropriate to it according to what is said.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	But if the patient is timid and does not expect a second operation due to his horror, then administer piercing according to what we have recommended that signified; and it is when you are certain through what we have said of the significations that this hernia is watery.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Then know that you seat the patient over some elevated seat, then pierce the pustule in the part which is lowest on him with spatulum, and make the piercing according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And let the opening be wide so that all the water may flow out.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	Then pause over the spot cotto and bind that and leave it, so that the remnant of the water runs out.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then heal that until the wound is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	But if opposition is to the discharge of the water in that hour when you pierce it: and that is not done except that the white membrane in the orifice of the wound makes opposition and prohibits the exit of the water, then know that you put into the wound a needle or instrument by which the water is extracted from the hydrocele, the form of which is preceded; or adjust in the pression of the wound a small.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And know that the water returns, and is driven out again after about a month or more; and when it has occurred, then let it be pierced according to that same mentioned manner, for the patient will thus pass his days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter .lxxxiii.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	Of incision on a fleshy hernia and its healing.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	Know that in the incision on this hernia there is a fearful loss of life in the greater dispositions; for it has been seen to me its dismissal and to be saved by that better.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And I remember the operation on that and the properties of the pustules.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, I say that the pustules are born in the bodies of which the testicles are composed and it is done for many causes: or due to acute sharp superfluity, which is effused into the testicles, or due to piercing.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And its color is according to the color of the body, and it does not ache in it, and it is a heavy pustule.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And often it is a pustule that has become lapsified, of which the color is dark, and there is no heat in it.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And sometimes it is done due to congestion of the veins, and due to inflammation of those thus as well as already having been perceived the memory of it, or due to inflammation of vessels.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	But what is done due to congestion of the veins is known through the dispersion of the pustule when you compress that with your fingers; and it does not ache.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	But what is done due to congestion of a vein is not dispersed from it any cause because of the compression with fingers.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that on this species incision be made and on the other fleshy parts; and it is that you cut into the scrotum of the testicles, and then extend the humor upward, and extract that from the white capsule, and ligature them, and cut into the suspensory ligament more than you extract that from all parts of the parts of the humor.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Therefore if the humor is already consolidated with those fleshy parts, then know that you extract the humor and cut into it.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is adhesion for some cause of the capsule, or between that which is between the vessels, then know that you release all that adhesion and cut into it by a round incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	But if there is generation of flesh in the place of the adhesion which is behind, then know that you cut into all that is of it, and extract the humor thus as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Therefore when your operation is complete, then fill the wound with wool dipped in rose-oil and wine; and then heal that with the other healing until it is healed.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter 64.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	On the treatment of hernias that are wet.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	Wheat is an inflammation wrapped in some wrapper resembling a bud with softening of the testicles, and it makes difficult movement, exercise, and ambulation for the patient.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the treatment of this ailment, there is fear of what precedes it, for which reason there is a reminder.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, we will discuss the second one later, as we did with the first.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And I say that you should elevate the patient on a bed; and then tie the testicles to the lower parts; and hold the scrotum with your left hand while pulling up with your right; and keep the other assistant holding him by his arms, stretching them vigourously.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And you have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands. And then insert a sharp, broad knife horizontally into the right side of the vessels where they are exposed.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And then hold the patient in such a way that the vessels are made to be dispersed and separated from each other by the knife. And then cut out, as we have said before, any arterials which are in the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And if you find that the hernia is caused by hot humours infiltrating somewhere in the body and pain occurs in some part of the body, then do a pointed cautery on the surface of the foot. And then insert a needle into those places, with a double thread, the first one at the front of the places where the wetness occurs, and the other one turned around at the back of them.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out. And insert them into the middle of that location with a right-angled cut according to the length of the body, and extract what is aggregated there of putrid and corrupted humours.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And if the hernia is caused by hot humours infiltrating somewhere in the body and pain occurs in some part of the body, then do a pointed cautery on the surface of the foot. And then treat the wound with treatment for other wounds from which pus is meant to be generated so that the vessels which turn black from two testicles, it is not bad for that.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	And if the hernia is caused by cold humours infiltrating somewhere in the body and pain occurs in some part of the body, then do a pointed cautery on the surface of the foot. But if wetness occurs to all the vessels, then the testicles should be extracted or that the testicles, because of their separation from the vessels, be deprived of all nourishment through the incision of the vessels, and that they be withered, or separated so that there is no benefit to them.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter 65.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	Of the cure of intestinal hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The occurrence of this hernia is through an incision that goes under the skull covering the belly, from the angle of the navel, so that it cuts into some of the intestines at that rupture.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And if you find that the hernia is caused by hot humours infiltrating somewhere in the body and pain occurs in some part of the body, then do a pointed cautery on the surface of the foot. And this rupture is either of the skull or from an incision in it; and these two species occur for many causes: either from a blow, or from falling, or from crying, or from the elevation of something heavy, or similar.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	And if the hernia is caused by cold humours infiltrating somewhere in the body and pain occurs in some part of the body, then do a pointed cautery on the surface of the foot. And the sign of this, when it is from an extension of the skull, is that it occurs gradually over a long time, and does not occur suddenly, and there is wetness inside the abdomen because the skull compresses the intestine.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And if the hernia is caused by hot humours infiltrating somewhere in the body and pain occurs in some part of the body, then do a pointed cautery on the surface of the foot. And the sign of this is when it is from an incision in the skull, because at the beginning it causes very violent pain suddenly; and there is diverse wetness apparent below the neck, and that is because of displacement of the intestine, and the body of it towards the front at the edges outside the skull.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And if the hernia is caused by cold humours infiltrating somewhere in the body and pain occurs in some part of the body, then do a pointed cautery on the surface of the foot. And sometimes it is forgotten with the intestine, and this hernia is called intestinal stranglehold.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And sometimes it is forgotten with the intestine because of displacement of the intestine and for another cause; and this hernia is called intestinal ring-like. And sometimes it is made by windiness, and sometimes there is a fissure in the intestine, and here it is retained, and there is great harm to the patient, and sometimes it causes bad and worse pain when it is pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And sometimes it is made because of displacement of the intestine and for another cause; and this hernia is called intestinal ring-like. And in the treatment of these ailments with iron, there is fear, so that one should avoid the casting of that.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And if the hernia is caused by hot humours infiltrating somewhere in the body and pain occurs in some part of the body, then do a pointed cautery on the surface of the foot. And the manner of the operation for this is that you command the patient to push in the intestine with his hand towards its cavity if he obeys your instruction, and then he should be laid on his back between your hands, and raise up his legs.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And then tighten the ligature which binds the ligature of the testicles to the parts above, and insert the ligature of the testicles all along; and place the hooks of the incision between two lips according to how you open the incision with them.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And make the incision according to the amount that is possible for you, so that all of the hernia is cut out.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And then cut away any excess tissue which is underneath the ligature of the testicles, while making sure that the white, hard surface of each part is exposed.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	Then you put your finger into that which binds the testicle, where it is between the white surface and the surface of the hernia, and release with your finger any adhesions which are at the back of the hernia.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And then use your hand to loosen the ligature of the testicles on the sides, and at the same time extend the white surface upwards with your left hand and lift the hernia with the surface towards the incision; and tell your assistant to stretch out the hernia inwards while you dissolve any adhesions behind it using a complete solution.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And check with your fingers that there is no cause for the intestine to be wrapped up in the white, hard surface.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	But if you find a cause on him, then you push it back into his belly.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And then take a needle in which there is a large thread made of six threads, and insert it through the back of the surface beneath the ligature of the testicles, where the incision is; and then push the ends of the thread which are sticking out into the intestine so that there are four threads, and tie some of them into a cross shape; and hold with your hand the surface of which we said there is beneath the ligature of the testicles with strong forceps from two sides.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And then wrap the ends of the threads and tie them with strong forceps so that none of the blood vessels which surround these can send anything through which an apoplectic stroke may not happen here.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And put another pair of forceps according to the first pair of forceps, long enough that it is three fingers away from him; and these two pairs of forceps will take away from the surface beneath the ligature of the testicles the amount of the size of a finger, and insert all around according to a round shape, and hold the hernia out.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And then insert in the part underneath the ligature of the testicles by incision from which blood and pus will flow, just as we have recommended earlier.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And then administer wool soaked in oil, and put it on the wound; and administer the forceps which we have recommended (and sometimes the white surface is cauterized where we said there is fear of a flow of blood, when several times this happens to them) and let go of the forceps so that by itself it falls.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	But if his healing is delayed, then let warm water be applied, and put it over him so that he falls according to what we have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And then heal the wound with the other treatment of wounds so that it is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter 66:
De hernia ventosa.	Of a hernial hernia.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia, I have not seen anyone who has been treated for it with iron.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first thing to do is that it is made as we have recommended in the hernia which is with the testicles; and which is to tie the vessels over there with ease for him; and then dry up the apoplectic stroke around it by opening it, while the vessels fall down.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And heal the wound as we have said so that it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter 67:
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	Of the separation which is made in the throat.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Sometimes there is a rupture in the throat as we have said, and the spot protrudes.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And do not let any cause of the intestines enter the throat; and if they enter, it is rare; and return from it in all hours.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	But if the time is prolonged with this, it is a wound in the surface where the intestine goes into the surface; and it happens because of the extension of the surface which is in the throat as we have said, and which cause is that the surface is stretched, and then softens and the spot protrudes.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the cure for it is by cauterization just as we have given the description of it.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And sometimes it is cured by iron in this way: and the patient lies on his back between your hands, and then dry up the spot of the rupture of the apoplectic strokes sticking out with incision according to the length of three fingers.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then strengthen the white surface which is beneath the ligature so that it is exposed.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And then take the thread and put it over the spot protruding from the surface, and press it against the front of the belly.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And then sew the two spots sticking out at the end of the thread on the surface, and adjust with the stitch one of them to the other.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And then pull out the end of the thread, and do not cut it from the surface at all, nor extend the hernia, nor any other cause as we have made you know in the cure for a hernial hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And then heal that with the treatment of wounds, and as you insert the threads, cleanse it and restore the wound so that it is consolidated; because the surface is contracted and the protrusion of the rupture is not adjusted.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cauterization is better in this spot because it is closer to health.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter 68:
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	Of softening of the ligature of the testicles.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	Sometimes the ligature of the testicles in some men is softened because the flesh which is between there is softened, and it is felt that its guard is relaxed.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Therefore it is necessary for that person who is treated in the cure for him to lie on his back according to how he feels, and insert all of the ligature which is softened over the natural ligature; and then sew two lips with a stitch.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you want, cut in the beginning the superfluity of the softened ligature with three or four cuts and with a firm stitch.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And then insert between the stitches; and then heal by the treatment of wounds so that it is healed and the threads fall down.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter 69:
De castracio.	Of castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	Know that castration in our law is forbidden, but it was allowed to me that I remember it in this book; and the reminder of it is not necessary except for two ways, of which one is for the doctor when he is questioned about it, so that he knows how to cure it if it happens; and the other way is that we many times have needed castration of other animals for our young by them, as with horses, and oxen, and pigs, and similar animals.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And therefore I say that castration is made in two ways: either by traction, or by incision into an incision.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	But in that which is made by traction, the way of the operation is that we make the animal lie in warm water so that his genitals are softened and hang down.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	And then take those with your hand so that they are resolved and do not appear under the touch.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	But in castration made by incision and wound, have the animal and press the ligature of his testicles with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	And now tie the suspension and insert it into each eye with a section in between where two processes are proceeding.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	Then insert those that you have scalded.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And don't put anything on the head, except for a subtle cloth which is over the vessels.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this method of castration is better when done by incision because a strong incision leaves no cause from the testicles for the animal to desire sex.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	Then cure the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter 70:
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	Of the cure for hermaphroditism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphroditism in men is according to two methods: the first is when there appears a space between the cords of the testicles, in that which is between two testicles; it looks like a woman's vagina with balls.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And sometimes from this cord urine flows as well.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	But in women there is only one type: the clitoris of a woman on her vagina is like two testicles of a man, a little at the entrance and as big as a pearl; and two testicles as well.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the cure is with three remedies: two from men and one from women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And you shall insert those tight meats between which the moisture flows out; then cure those with the cure for the other wounds as well.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And the second type of men from which urine flows in the cord of the testicles has no cure or treatment for it.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 71:
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	Of a hernia and protuberant flesh caused by women.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	A strong hernia is tightly bound over natural causes until it is stressed and made tight like a rope: and sometimes it is enlarged in some women to the point that it spreads out as well as in men, and enters into intercourse.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Then if you have an excess of hernia, hold it with your hand or a bandage and insert it.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not finish in insertion, especially at the tip of the penis, so that you don't experience blood flow.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	Then cure it with wound medicine until it is healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	But protuberant flesh is flesh that grows in the womb of the mother until it fills up that space; and often it hangs out at the front like a tail (and for this reason some first called this "tailed disease"); therefore when we insert it, as we do with a hernia, let us cure it until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter 72:
De curacio de alratica.	Of the cure for elephantiasis.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Elephantiasis is when the clitoris of a woman is not perforated, or has a small hole.
E es o natural o accidental.	And it can be natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental is due to a disease that preceded it, and it is made by tightly bound flesh or a subtle wound or thickness.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	And it is made in the front of the mother' vagina, or in her ribs, or on top or bottom of her vagina, and it prohibits intercourse and impregnation and childbirth, and often prohibits menstruation as well.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	And knowledge of it is made by examination by the midwife, if the opening is apparent, then push it in; but if it is not apparent, then you should pierce it with your needle or with a pin.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	But if the opening is due to a subtle wound and it is near both lips, then cut and break it open.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And you shall rest your fingers on both lips, and then insert your needle in the middle between both hands.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the woman should be on her back, with her legs stretched out, and then stretch both lips so that the subtle wound is broken open and the opening is wide open.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And then take wool and dip it in oil and place it on the spot, and keep it warm with a cloth every day so that the incision is not closed up again.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	But if the wound is large and thick, then you shall insert it with broad lye or with myrrh resin.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	But if the opening is due to flesh, then suspend it with a bandage and insert that.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And have these remedies to stop the flow of blood without biting, like hemlock, and dragon' blood, and gum mastic, bound up with egg white.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	Then administer a broad lead rod so that the wound is not closed up again quickly.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And hold it for several days and administer hot water from a bath.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	Then it is cured with the other cure of consolidation until it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And sometimes accidents happen in childbirth due to other meats, and then insert according to this manner as well.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	But if it is due to a ulcer in the womb which is not made contrary by iron in any way, then cure it with these remedies:
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter 73:
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	Of the cure of hemorrhoids and of a tail and of a red botul that happens in the clitoris of women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids are an appearance of orifices of veins from which blood flows continuously; and with them go old hemorrhoids as well.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And I have also spoken about their species and their signs, and I have directed those that received cure and those who did not receive cure as well.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore I say that hemorrhoids and their ulcers when they are in the front of the mother' vagina and do not appear with a feeling, then in those there should be no cure made with iron.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	But those which are in the orifices of the mother' vagina over which a feeling appears, then those that are cured.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And you shall place the woman in a bath and then stretch it with tweezers or with an abrasive needle and insert those into the wounds.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	Then powder the blood flow of one of the internal bleeding without biting, like hemlock and its likes as well.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	Then pull on her feet for an hour, then place it in hot water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the blood flow persists, then make it boil in a decoction of myrrh and of husks of pomegranates and of shells and their likes as well.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	Then take flour of bran and cook that with honey and sour wine and make a plaster out of it and place it on its back.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the blood is scanty, then boil it; but if not, make it adhere with two bandages, and on the nipples their incision as well.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then take wool and dip it in juice of colander or in juice of arnagloza or in juice of gorse with wine and make it adhere to the spot; then cure the spot with unguents until it is healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	But if there is a hard ulcer, then you shall insert that which appears to you of that according to what I have said in the incision of the tail.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then cure it until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter 74:
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	Of a wound made accidentally in the mother.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Many species of ulcers happen in the mother' vagina, like an ulcer and an ulcer with a tooth and an ulcerative ulcer and an ulcer with pus and a botul and a tail and others as well.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already spoken about these diseases and their species and their signs, and their cures in the division of them as well.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And here is what I think it means: "And now I will tell you in this treatise about the pustule called ' caut le qual ve en la mayre' (the one that appears on the mother's breast), and if you want to know how the operation of it is done with iron."
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	And now consider whether the pain of the pustule at its beginning is acute with percussion and phlegm and fever, and if you see that swelling and if it is on top of that feeling, then do not cut into it, and cure it with what helps in the maturation until that acuteness of the accidents cease.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And then you shall make the woman lie on her side that has two sides; and recline on his back and adjust his feet to the part most below the belly, and let his thighs be expanded, and place his arms below his elbows, and tie each with a bandage in whatever is convenient.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	Then the midwife shall follow on the right side and administer the instrument by which the opening of the breast is made, the form of which will come in those causes that are to be made properly.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And when you want to administer this instrument, you shall put on the nipple of the woman's breast, and that which is inside the instrument should not be larger than the nipple of the breast and lead the patient.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	But if the instrument is larger than the nipple of the breast, then you shall pause powders on the texture of the nipple of the breast so that it is prohibited that any instrument enter into the nipple of the breast.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And you shall put the vertitge that runs in the instrument from the side more above, and that the minister has the instrument and revolves the vertitge until the opening of the breast is made.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when the excision appears, and it is touched with the hand and is soft and moist, then you shall dry that head of it with a sponge on a stick.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the pus is evacuated, then you shall put in the wound a poultice soaked in rose oil or oil with some astringency; and pause the cautery on the incision on the nipple of the breast.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And stop up the breast and over the bandage clean wool soaked in water in which there are bruised mallows.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then it is to be cured after two days with ointment suitable for that until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And sometimes the breast and the bandage is washed in that which is made astringent with water and honey, and then with water in which there is bruised lark's heel or of long aristology, and then return to the ointment.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the wound is within the breast that is swollen, then you shall be prohibited from the cure of it by iron, having cured that with what we have said in the division.
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter 75.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach midwives in what way the live fetuses are to be treated when they come according to a non-natural figure.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	It is necessary that the midwife know in the beginning the figure of natural childbirth by signs of it, and it is that when you see the woman express at the parts below and desiring to smell the air, and over that she is stretched out because of that which is above her, and hastens the ejection of the fetus, then you should know that this part is according to a natural figure, and is its ejection over her head, and the second one with that or suspended or hanging from the umbilical.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	So when you see those signs, then the belly of it should be compressed so that the fetus descends lightly when they descend over her head, and the second one with that or suspended or hanging from the umbilical is washed of those superfluities by good washing.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu .i., o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	But that which is other than this part is non-natural and not laudable, for when the fetus is ejected over its feet and the body of it is ejected before the head of it and the feet of it, and its hand one or to the foot of it .i.. or is ejected the head of it and its hand, or to the belly of it, and hard turned over his neck, and resembling figures of it non-laudable.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	So it is necessary that the midwife be wise and subtle in all those causes, and that she guard against error and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And I am showing you all figures of those, and what cunning is in those so that it be indicated by that and is standing over that.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the fetus is ejected over its head by natural labor, and that is violent on the woman and is made to it difficult part, and sees the strength of it already debilitated, then make that cease , or that the women hold it, and evaporate the semen of it with fenugreek cut and with oiled humors.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	Then the midwife shall insert between its fingers a little sponge and split with that the second one, or dry that with his nail until it runs out that which is in her of moisture.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press the belly of the woman so that she descend the fetus.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	But if it does not descend, then the woman should be made astringent of ptilli and mucilage of fenugreek with cress.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And then command it, the midwife, that it is compressed and make that vomit with condition; and take its mouth and nose for one hour, for the fetus will be expelled immediately.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if the two hands of the fetus are expelled at the beginning, then you shall reduce those with little ease little by little.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	But if it does not obey the instrument, then put the woman on a bed and raise its feet up, and then rock the bed to the ground; and the woman shall be held so that she does not fall because of the rocking.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the hands are not turned inside out and the fetus is dead, then insert those and extract the part of the fetus or tie the body to the hand of it with a cloth and extract that with equality, for that will be expelled.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	Of ejection of the fetus over its feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the fetus comes over its feet, then you shall push those up, and then turn the fetus a little, and then that you suck it in, and then take one of its feet and extend those little by little.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	But when it is ejected in between the thighs, then you command it to be pressed, and make that vomit with condition, for it will be expelled if God wills it.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it is not expelled by that which we have recommended, then you return the fetus little by little so that you make that second figure natural, for that will be expelled a lighter ejection.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is prohibited by all that we have recommended, then take of mucilage of alder and of gum dissolved, and beat all in the mortar with good beating, and line all over the semen of the woman, the bottom of the belly of it.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	Then make that boil in tepid water, so that you achieve the hypochondrium.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when you see that the parts below of it are relaxed, then make to it sublimation of myrrh and sub-burn that at him.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when the sublimation for one hour, then you make it sit on a bed, and then make that vomit and open his mouth, and raise that up and press the bottom part of its belly with little compression, for the fetus will be expelled immediately.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Examine the feet on his own knees and hands.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the feet are examined in this way, then you gradually insert your fingers; and the woman should be lying on her back, with her legs bent and her feet pointing downward, and someone else sitting on her thighs, holding her hands.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	Then gently press on his belly little by little; and draw out what is under his feet from the ears as far down as possible, until it is prepared at the lowest point.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the feet are not drawn out, then take his feet and move them violently, and gently press what is above the hypochondrium little by little until the feet can reach higher up.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	Then insert your fingers and gently massage the foot little by little, and command the woman to exhale until the foot is drawn out.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Examine the feet lengthwise, with one of his hands.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	It should be reduced by hand; but if it cannot be reduced, then elevate the woman and have her walk.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if she cannot walk, then have her lie on her back and strike her thighs with violent blows; and give her remedies which are composed of mucilaginous substances.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if labor has begun, then have her lie on her back, and study the reduction of the hand; and draw out the foot according to its natural shape, and have the woman sneeze, and command him to press inwards until it is drawn out.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Examine the feet on his knees with his hands expanded, and his chest against his mother's back.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	Have the midwife take hold of the foot and gently turn it little by little; this will make it easier.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when it is drawn out and its length is equal to that which we have mentioned, then anoint the navel with oil and mucilaginous substances.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	Then command him to press inwards little by little; and when you have done this, have her lie on one side and command her to be inclined onto the right side, and then command him to press inwards; and have her sneeze with force.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	The exit of the fetus prepared on its side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When they are about to come out of the mother according to this method, examine and then insert your finger inside in order to remove moisture.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the fetus is suspended over its face and neck, then insert your finger into the navel so that it is not retained and delayed.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	Then push the fetus inwards towards the inner parts while you pause according to what is mentioned, and command the woman to press inwards several times; then it will come out with easy exit, if God wills it.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	The exit of twins or of multiple fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Know that twins are born in many cases, and some give birth to three or four, but this is strange and rare; however, there are natural causes for it, and they do not live.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And count them, whether they are multiples, a second one is born, and they are separated by the umbilical cord; distinguish those which are inside the membrane in the navel of each of them. And sometimes they are born like this with easy natural exit, and sometimes they exit with non-natural exit as we have mentioned.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if they are difficult to give birth, and reach the point that we have mentioned about non-natural figures, then you should treat them as we have recounted.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the midwife does what she does with facility and skill; and with delay, and is ingeniously prepared according to how it is for him in bringing about health.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Recollection of that which is formed in the womb from embryos, and miscarriages.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Sometimes they are formed in the womb one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and even ten times, and I have verified that a woman who had an abortion six times had them all formed, which cause was made by the wise sages.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all this is known to be in the science of the midwife; how strong it is for her to see that small thing, and therefore pause at it.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter .lxxvi.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	On the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you treat the dead fetus with what we have mentioned in the division of medicine and it is not taken out by force, then you should consider whether the woman is of sound nature and does not have any of the accidents for which she is feared to lose.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Then let the woman lie on her back with her chest inclined downward and her legs elevated.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	And his assistant should hold that in two parts or be tied down onto the bed so that the body of him does not extend because of the extraction of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	Then anoint the mouth of the mother of him with oiled herbs and with mucilaginous substances of aniseed and of fenugreek, and of linseed.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	Then the midwife anoint her hand with those oils and mucilaginous substances; then insert her hand with facility into the mother, and then seize hold of the hand in the place where the nails are on the fetus.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	And convenient places in which: then consider whether the fetus is prepared to be drawn towards its head; then you place the nails in the holes of it, or in the neck, or in the mouth, or in the palate, or under the beard, or in the armpits, or below the ribs, or under the hips.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	But if the drawing is towards its feet, then in the ankle, or in the middle of the thigh.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And have the nail with the right hand, and pause the crookedness of it in that place which is between the fingers of the left hand; then insert the hand with facility, and put the nail into one of those places which we have mentioned, so that it reaches to the desired cause.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	Then pause and put into its mouth another nail, or the third if it is necessary, so that there be a dual traction, and not an extension according to its straightness only.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And let it be drawn out entirely, so that the exit of him is made far away as it is done in teeth because of its extraction.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And consider in him that the extension is softened; and if any part of him is retained, then let the midwife anoint his teeth with oil and insert that medicine, and turn it while that which is retained is drawn out.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Then if the part of the fetus is drawn out, then the nails are moved into another place where it has been put; and do this so that all the fetus is drawn out.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	But if the hand is drawn out in front of the other, and it is not possible to reduce it by constriction, then let the drape be wrapped around it; and then draw it out so that all is drawn out, and insert it or in the joint of the hand or in the wrist.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And do likewise with the other hand and feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	But if the head of the fetus is large, or it happens to him constriction in its exit, or it has water on its head tightly bound, then let the midwife insert between his fingers asperatum spiny and split the head, or cut it with an instrument which is named “alundat”, the form of which comes with the forms of other instruments in the chapter which is proper to this.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And similarly, if the foot is large in size by nature, then cover that with a bandage, or take that with a splint as we have said; and then pull out the bones with forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head is dislocated and bent towards the collarbone, then it should be cut so that the moisture in the foot is released.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	But if it is not complicated or stuck in dislocation, then you should move the head as soon as possible to you.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the bottom of the abdomen is pustular or it is waterlogged, then cover that so that you pierce where the moisture is in it.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	But if the foot is on its feet, then the attraction of it is lighter and the direction of it towards the mouth of the mother is lighter.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	But if it is bent by the abdomen and foot, then cover that with a cloth that you have wrapped around your hand, and cut the abdomen and foot so that what is in them flows out.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	But if the other members are stuck and the head is turned, then the midwife inserts her left hand; but if the mouth of the mother is open, then she inserts her hand into the perineum, and circles with that the head, and pulls it with the said fingers towards the mouth of the mother, and then she inserts into it an inch, or two inches, and pulls it with those.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mouth of the mother is bent by pustules pressing on it, then it should not be pulled on; rather, then administer application of moist causes that are fatty.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And administer poultices; and follow the patient in waters that soften and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the foot is on its side, then if possible it should be straightened; and administered what we have said in the living foot.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if that is not possible, then it should be cut into pieces, and pulled out.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And so that you do not leave any cause inside the uterus.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed all of your operation, then administer what we have said about the cure for pustules that occur from the mother.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if blood flow occurs, then use waters that are astringent and administer the other cure.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And I have also seen a woman whose belly contained a dead fetus, and moreover another fire was burning inside, and moreover the other fire is the dead fetus.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It happened to her that after a long time a pustule occurred in her womb; and it was swollen so that fire opened up, and it began to spurt out.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And I was called to the cure of her, and I medicated her for a long time, and the plague was not consolidated.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then I put on her some poultices of strong attraction, and pulled out a bone from her, and then after a few days, another bone was pulled out; and I was very much amazed how in the belly there were bones.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then I considered that they were of the bones of the dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Then I continued the plague, and pulled out from her many bones, the woman being in such dispositions, and she lived in such a way for a long time, and one small spurt of blood occurred to her.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And I did not believe anything strange, but rather that in it is skill and help to what the doctor crafts with his hand for cure administers.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Of the forms of the instruments that are necessary to pull out the fetus.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Form of verity with which the mother is opened:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of strength in which the ribs are bent, to that bending there are two virtues at both extremes of two ends.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	But this virtue should be more subtle of constriction, and let it be made of ivory or of wood of beech trees.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And let the breadth of each trunk be two fingers and the edge of each on both sides one finger, and the length of each is a palm and half; and in the middle place of two trunks are two fastenings of that tree trunks which are already fastened, of which the length is the measure of a palm and a little more, and the breadth of each is two fingers, or a little more.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And those two additions are inserted into the mouth of the mother so that it is opened by them when you turn the two prescribed virtues.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Other similar form more subtle and farther away:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	Let it be made of ivory or of wood according to the likeness of forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	But in the end of it are two additions like this with grooves, and the length of those additions is a palm, and the breadth of each is two fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open the mother with them, then let her lean back on the feet hanging down, opening what is between her thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	And then open your hand with the instrument thus as you do with forceps according to the quantity that you want of the opening of the mouth of the mother so that the midwife does what she wants.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of verity which the ancients said:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	Form of impulsion by which the fetus is pushed:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	Form of compression by which the large head is contained:
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is like forceps whose end has teeth, thus with grooves, and some times it is made long thus as with forceps, thus with teeth of saw by which it is cut and contained.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Form of compression few:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Form of a nail having one spine:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Form of a nail having two spines:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Form of forceps whose teeth close by which the head of the fetus is contained:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	Form of spatula having two ends by which the head is cut off:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Form of two spatulas wide:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All those instruments are exercised, and when more they are multiplied and prepared by the artisans, then it is farther from his operation and farther for men by its quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And let not work of those instruments be known, for the necessity of those is inexcusable.
De extraccio de la segondina.	Of extraction of the placenta:
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the placenta is retained after childbirth, then let you command the woman to retain her urine, and then make her vomit with cold water, and if by that it is discharged, good.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if not, then you take a cloth and pierce the covering with a hole and pause in that herbs burning the mouth of the mother, thus with hot water and rue and anise and camomile and scichado arabic and cassia ligneous and sassafras.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them be soaked in water in the cloth, and pause that over the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And then pause a tube of reed in the mouth of the mother, and hold that in so that the evaporation went to the hollow of the mother.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And then make her vomit thus as we have said, and the placenta will be discharged quickly.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	But if that cure is applied and it is not discharged, then let the midwife soak her left hand in sesame oil or in mustard water, and then insert that in the mouth and scrape with that the placenta, and when you have found the placenta, pull it out little by little according to how the mother does not feel violent attraction.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Before anyone is turned over onto his right or left side, he should be made comfortable.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And then the amount of attraction should be adjusted, for it will both obey and avoid adhesion.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mouth of the mother is constricted, we have already recommended a cure with sneezing and the application of oil with herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	But if all of the causes which we have recommended are not removed, then beware that you do not tire yourself out with repeated extraction, but instead, what comes out of him to the mouth of the mother, place it on the woman's chest, and anoint that with ointment and tetracycline; for that will cause it to rot in a few days, and it will be dissolved and removed.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	But when it rots, a foul odor rises to the head and stomach, and then the patient is tormented by that; and thus they should be administered under fumigation in an appropriate manner.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	But some of the Ancients have been tried out with fumigation of nettle and dry figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	Form for an instrument by which a woman is fumigated for retention of menstruation and the second month:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It should be made of glass or of horn.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And the narrow end should be placed in the vagina and the wider end over the fire, and the fumigation should be placed over the embers of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And she who has that within her should consume that fumigation and repeat another.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	For treatment of the child's anus, if not perforated:
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	Young children whose anuses are not perforated, their rectums are narrow and closed.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Thus the midwife who perforates that sphincter with her finger; and if not, perforate it with a sharp spatula, and beware that she does not touch the glans.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	And then place wool soaked in wine and oil over it; and cure that with ointment until it is healed.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	But if you fear that it is closed, then place a cannula in the anus for several days, and remove it when the child wants to defecate.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And sometimes the closing of the anus occurs due to consolidation of a hematoma or of an abscess; thus that consolidation should be incised, and then it should be cured as we have said about the cure and the plug.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	For treatment of the fistulas which appear afterwards:
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistulas which appear afterwards near the anus discharge pus and cause a knob and swelling, and they appear close to the anus or in the space of one finger.
E es una fistula o motas.	And it is a fistula or several.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And when that knob becomes old and discharges thin white or yellow pus, and sometimes some of these fistulas penetrate in several ways.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those which penetrate are known through what exits from them by the orifice and by flatulence; and sometimes it uses the patient for an orifice of exit, and often it is expelled from them with worms.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And sometimes from those fistulas some penetrate into the space of the bladder, and into the muscle of the penis; and sometimes they penetrate into the joint of the hip and into the socket of the shoulder.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And that in which a penetrating fistula is known to have penetrated into the anus and not to have penetrated, it is because you put your finger inside the anus, and push a thin probe of horn or iron into the fistula when there is no pain.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	But if in that there is pain, then push into it a thin probe of lead or hair from a horse's mane until you feel the probe or the hair in your finger.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel that at all and there is no process of excretion from the orifice, nor worms, nor flatulence, as we have said, then understand that it is not penetrating, and then turn to the cure.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the muscle of the penis, then its sign is the excretion of urine from that and prohibition of it so that the place is not consolidated with medicine.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	But if it is penetrating into the joint of the hip or into the socket of the shoulder, then its sign is that a probe goes through there if in it there is no pain within the socket, and pain in the circuit of the part; and that from it there is discharge of pus at all times; and that it does not respond to medicine, nor is healed with ointment.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those penetrating fistulas there is no cure of all, and the cure for those is labor and futility of the folk doctors about which they are established.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	But in that which is not penetrating and does not become old, healing with iron is expected according to what you have recommended, and that which has already been done and proven.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And it is that the patient lies between your knees over his chest and lifts his legs up over you, with his hips tilted towards his belly, and then push a probe of lead or horn into the fistula if there is pain in it; and understand the place where the probe goes through.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if that feels around the neck, then you put your finger inside the neck.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel in your finger the probe already placed discovered to penetrate, or the skin, then understand certainly that it is penetrating; and then do not labor over that, for there is no cure for that, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	But indeed some say that it is healed in some people with vinegar.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And of the medicine by which it is hoped to be healed immediately in him is that you ignite a small cautery according to the size of the fistula, as it has been preceded, and put that ignited into the fistula until it comes around the neck; and then repeat that two or three times until you understand that all those tightened fistulas which seem like a feather of a bird's quill are tightened.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And then cure that with waters wrapped in wool until all those tightened meats are healed, and then cure that with medicines which generate meat and consolidate it, and if it is healed, well; and if not, then it will not be healed at any time by another cure.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if the probe goes in and does not penetrate into your finger which is in the anus, and between that and the probe which is evidently of meat or of sphincter, and the fistula on what it severs the surface of the membrane, then dry up the membrane from the beginning of the fistula, and you will dry them up with the probe, and it will be in the fistula until the section comes to the place in which the end of the probe comes out, and by the probe it is freed and cut.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And then cleanse those tightened meats which are like a quill of a bird' s feather and do not break from any cause.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	But if flow of blood sometimes comes between you and your instrument when you push those meats, then the milk that is and the pus the leaner instrument is cauterized with fire or with sharp medicine, for cautery with fire tightens good two habits: it is tightening of those tightened meats, and abstention of blood by drying up of the moistness.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And then cure that with waters wrapped in wool or in cress until the place gets cold, and then cure the wound with hard meats which generate and consolidate.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And thus medicines in which there is stiffness and abstention; when then it is restored, it is already healed and do not fear recurrence.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	But if the fistula has already penetrated into the anus and is elongated from the surface of the body, then insert your little finger into the anus and explore it with that.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And therefore if you feel with your finger and find membrane or flesh, and it is near the penetration, then there is no operation on it but rather by way of trust and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	That cause is treated in one of three ways: either cauterizing it as we have said; or cutting into it until you reach its cavity so that you can insert instruments and make the wound clean; nor should you cut at all so that you do not pierce the sac containing the pus, but instead make the patient void his bowels against his will so that he expels the pus from the anus. Then treat the fistula with what we have said as quickly as possible; or elongate the membrane and open the pustule around the anus, either by probing with a tent or another instrument with a sharp end, then clean those fleshly fistulas which you can reach by cutting into them; and try to make a complete cure of the whole wound by cutting, and if the upper opening is not healed and the fistula remains open in the anal region, it will discharge pus more quickly through the anus.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes the fistula is finished in this way: it occurs when you insert the tent into the fistula, and there is pain around the anus on the surface of the body with the cord, and at the edge of the anus; then take a tent with a perforated end, which is made like the needle for piercing ears as follows:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	and insert it into that fistula, wrapped in a piece of cloth or around the edges; and then insert the tent with the needle into the fistula until you reach its cavity.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	But if it penetrates near the edge of the anus inside, then you withdraw the needle from that wound as you would insert your little finger into the anus; and pull out the end of the needle and bring the two ends together, and tighten each one, and leave them like that for a day or two, and when you have pushed the needle deeper into the flesh, tighten it so that those fleshly parts between the two ends of the needle are drawn in.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	Then treat the wound until it is healed and consolidated.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	But if the opening of the fistula is not penetrating, then make it penetrate in whatever way you are prepared to do, except into the rectum, for you should not pierce the sac; and then treat that until it is healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The shape of the splitting spatulas with which the fistula is split: one end is very sharp and the other blunt, so that it does not pierce what it should not, as I have said before.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	Of suturing hemorrhoids in which there is blood in the incision of those.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	There are two types of hemorrhoids: either they are between the anus like charcoal, or they are like grass fat.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And there are small and large ones, and the blood flows from them at times; they may be internal or external, and on the edges of the anus.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	However, those which are external to the anus are according to the months of little moisture; from which flows a watery fluid or a little blood with a continuous body; they are according to the color of the body.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the treatment for those which are inside the anus is that you command the patient to sit and to squeeze so that the anus protrudes and the hemorrhoids appear to you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you grab them and pull them out with your nails or whatever you have them with your fingernail, and then cut those to their roots.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	But if the nails are not gripped by them due to their moisture and softness, then take those with a rough cloth or a cord or a piece of wool, and pull them out with your fingers, and then cut them and probe their roots; or cauterize them as is preceded in the chapter on cauterizing.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And then treat those with the other cure until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the anus does not obey to defecation, then anoint the patient with ointment in which there is a small amount of mordicant, and let him be washed with that water which is in the anus and let him squeeze out the excrement quickly when he has been anointed.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	But if the hemorrhoids are external to the anus, then the cause of them is lightness; it is that you grab them with your fingernail or take them with a nail and probe them, and then treat them with what we have said until they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And he who has seen the incision, take a needle wrapped in cloth and insert it into the hemorrhoid and then probe with the needle into the root of the other part, and wrap both ends of the thread in the lower part of the needle, and tighten the hemorrhoid strongly with the thread; and cut the thread and pull out the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And do this to all of them, and leave one and not cut it, so that the superfluous blood runs from that one.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And then place over the anus a cloth soaked in rose oil or cerot; and place that over the anus and command the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then let him void his bowels so that it comes out; and when it is defecated, treat those with ointment or another cure until they are healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	Of the cure of fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Many times they happen because of dryness of a fissure or because of a contraction of nature.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And if they are old and not helped by that medicine, then take a tent with a sharp end or your fingernail and split them so that they become moist and let the edge of those above be split, which prevents those from healing; and then treat those until they are healed.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Then you dry them with a very violent friction so that there is bleeding and they are abraded; and then treat those until they are healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	Of the cure of hemorrhoids: this is the key.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	Know that hemorrhoids are a key; they are not unless the body is round according to the color of the body resembling the head of a nail, and it occurs throughout the body and especially in the lower parts: the feet and the fingers, and from these parts there is pain.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And then let that which is in the circle of the nail be cut, and let it be pulled out by its roots with forceps or nails, and then heal it.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you want, cauterize it as is preceded in its chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	But a wart is a small round asperity on the surface of the body, and many times it comes to children's hands.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And its treatment is that you stretch and probe it, or that you tighten it with a thread or nail so that it comes out.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you want, cauterize it, as we have said, by fire or sharp medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And then they are eradicated both ways with the instrument which I will tell you.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	But a mole is a large asperity on the surface of the body near the anus; and when it is rubbed that mole is like a bite of an ant, and it occurs all over the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	And the cure for it is that you take a penile catheter made of goose feather or vulture feather, which is strong, and place it over the fissure within which the foreskin contains the glans; then rotate your hand with the catheter so as to insert what is inside the foreskin and pause it in the flesh of the penis, thereby removing the foreskin from its root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, do this with an ergot or a needle according to this form:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	Let the part above the catheter be drawn out with subtlety, silent (so that it is not perforated), wrapped up so that over the said part the sensation of touch and the revolution of it are abolished.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you wish to cauterize the foreskin according to what is said in the cauterization of atheyl in the chapter on cauteries.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	Of the forms of instruments that are administered to give enemas.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Sometimes enemas are given with silver or lead, or melted ergot, or malleated; and sometimes they are given with those instruments small and large according to which they are administered, for that which is administered in the cure of little children must be small; and that of which the anuses are fissured or painful, the enemas of these should be small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of a large enema and few:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The head of the catheter above, in which the pouch is tied, should be ample according to this manner; and it is to him distinction where the pouch is tied thus with threads.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the extremity of it below, which is inserted in the anus, should be silent (so that it is not open) very much, drawing to subtlety; and on one side of it are two slits, and on the other side a slit, and the breadth of the slit according to the thickness of the rays and more gross a little.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And the pouch in which are placed the medicines of animal bladder or wool, and its root is a palm.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And it should be perforated with many slits thus as it is turned over; and if the space which is between the slits, the thickness of the said.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And then insert into those slits strong, raw bile which is of twelve biles, or pour it around them; and attach with that the pouch; and when it is placed on him the pouch, it should be bound at the head of the enema between two distinctions with a strong constriction, and then enema with it every slit: But the quality of enemaing with that is that you fill the pouch with medicine, which is warmed according to the quantity of the tolerance of the patient; and beware that it is not too hot nor too cold.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	And then the patient should recline on his back, and elevate his legs up and place below him a bed or a bench; and then anoint the extremity of the cautery with oil or with white of egg or with mucilage of fenugreek or of similar; and then insert that into the anus with ease, and then the minister takes the pouch and squeezes it with two hands and empties with force into the enema all that is in the enema; and then pull out the enema and let the patient raise his legs to the wall.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine forces that to exit, let him hold as much as he can; and if he sleeps with that for a whole night, it is better for his healing.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	But if you enema him in the illnesses of a swollen belly and his exit coats it, then repeat the cautery until he is healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if in the anus are hemorrhoids or painful tumors, then let the enema be very subtle and silent, of those enemas with which children are enemaed.
De curacio de las plaguas.	Of the cure of sores.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	You have already said in the division of the cure of sores what was convenient to the liver, and I say thus the cure of those with hand and medicines according to the complement.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore I say that sores are diverse according to what causes sores and according to the place on which they fall.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes by which many times sores are made are thus with stone, or incision of a knife or of awl, or impact with a spear, or with staff, or with arrow, or similar to those of such causes.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	But the sores that are in the places of the body are thus with a sore which falls on the head, or neck, or feet, or belly, or throat, and similar to those of the members.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And I am counting the cure of some sores so that you pause that reasoning and rule over the other sores.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And I will begin of the sores of the head simple, for the remembrance of the compounded will come to the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Therefore I say that when it happens in the head a simple sore and there is no fracture, then consider: if it is by impact of stone or similar, and the tendon has only been torn and it is a great sore and you fear about that patient having an abscess, then you cut it and flebotomize the cephalica immediately, and do not delay that; and extract from him blood according to the quantity of his strength if there is no prohibitive cause of phlebotomy, mostly if the blood which exits from the sore is little.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And let the phlebotomy be on the contrary of the side of the sore; and beware of the patient having repletion and of wine and coarse foods.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	But if from the minor cause any prohibition, then it is diminished in food and do not come close to flesh nor wine.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And pause over the sore if it happens an abscess on him, cut it and pour into it oil boiled by itself or wine in which is stirred.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	But if it is certain of an abscess on him, then pause over the sore if it is recent with his blood and the air has not changed that powder which I will count next shortly small.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed that, then pause over it some ointments until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	But if the sore is great or is by incision of knife and similar, and its lips are not pulled together by threads, then pull those together with sutures according to what I will count of their sutures.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	But if the sore is already uncovered of bone and pen, and there is no retention of it except for a small sling, then insert that and then cure the sore with medicines and restore the flesh after in place of tendon, and command to the patient that he abstain from foods in which is their thickness: caps and formen cut and similar to them, until it is compounded.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you putrefaction in the tendon and it does not adhere to bone, then you insert all that rotted and throw that out, and then cure that.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	But if in these sores is artery or vein from which blood might flow, and it is not stopped by medicines, then you inquire over the artery, and if you cut that not-incised, then you insert that with spath, or tie that; and if necessity compels you to do what we have said, then cauterize until the blood is stopped.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these sores are simple and small, then the cause of them is cooling; also that you powder over those this powder, for when the air changes that.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	And the manner of the powder is this: take oil of fennel one part, dragon blood two parts, not-extinguished three parts; let all be well beaten and sifted, and of that be the sore filled, and let it be bound with good constriction so that it presses on that until it hardens, and let the blood coagulate.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And then tighten that above with powder and let it stay like that until the patient is healed and the medicine has taken effect.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And sometimes they do this alone when they are not in the presence of their senses and dragon's blood.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And they make this operation on great wounds when it is convenient that it be applied directly to the wound and tightly bound, and on fresh wounds with their blood, which the air has not altered.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has altered them, and especially in the summer, it is not necessary to apply this powder, but rather heal those wounds with what we have said before, by placing on them some cooked ointments or a poultice made of wheat flour mixed with water and honey until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	But if it happens that there is a broken bone in the wound, and it is small, then you should remove it with tweezers.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And I will describe how to heal fractures of the head when the skull has been damaged.
De las plaguas del col.	Of wounds to the neck:
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	But if the wound occurs in the neck, then there is no difference in its treatment from a wound to the head when it is simple.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	But if the nerve of the neck is cut, or an artery, then there should be no movement of that area but rather it should be treated with something that makes a strong contraction, like vinegar and vitriol, which are similar to one another in their effect on nerves and blood vessels.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And you should apply nothing to the wound that is hot, for the substance of the nerve is very sensitive, and its connection goes through to the brain, which is the most important part of all the members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And when it is healed by remedies that are light, like washing it with warm water, or applying some ointment made of rosewater or not, and then drying it in the sun until it is healed, as well as using moistened bandages.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	But if the wound is large, then use stitches or close up the lips of it, and heal that area with powder until it is healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	But if the wound has depth or there is suppuration in the wound to the lower part of it, then pierce it in the lowest spot.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	But if an artery is cut and there is bleeding, then stop it or dry it up, or ligature it, or cautery it if necessary to do so.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the vertebrae of the neck have been split or broken, and the veins of the neck have not been cut, then you should close up the lips of the wound with stitches along the bones of the vertebrae and not touch it; before doing so, bring back that area to its natural shape, and then tightly bind it with a decent bandage, and keep it like that for several days.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	But if the wound has been caused by pressure on the bone, then you should pierce it, and if there are any fragments of bone in the wound, extract them all; and whatever is not apparent, let it be exposed so that the wound can suppurate, and the pus can drain out.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the wound is fresh, then powder it with the powder that has been recommended to you.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	But if there is a fistula in the wound, then heal it with something that I will describe later in this chapter.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Of wounds to the back or similar, when they are made by a spear or a javelin or a lance or similar:
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a wound from a lance or javelin, and you see how deep it is, then know that such a wound is usually fatal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if there is no depth to it and the wound is fresh with blood on it, then you should apply powder to it in the first hour, and not tighten it so that the blood is not retained in its depth but rather returns to the heart and leaves the patient, but rather apply an attractive ointment, and wash it twice a day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the ointment is not available, then you should stop up the hole of the wound with a piece of wool so that it sucks out what is moist inside; and make the patient sleep on the wound so that what is inside flows out.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	But if three days or more have passed and the patient has no spasms nor trembling of the heart nor stricture of breath, and sees all other good signs of healing, then know that the wound is saved; and then heal it with poultices and with the other remedies until it is healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	But if healing does not happen, and the wound has been open for a long time, then know that it is a fistula; heal it therefore according to what I have described in its chapter.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the wound is from a spear or javelin and is simple on the surface of the foot or back, then heal it with something that precedes stitches if it is large, or with powder if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	But if there has been pressure on the bone, and only a little of it is split, then you should twist the wound and close to extract those pieces, if they are separated.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	But if they are not separated, then let them be exposed so that the wound can suppurate, for their extraction is easier when it is suppurating.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And for other accidental wounds on the other members, the treatment in healing is the same as what has been said before.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of wounds to the abdomen:
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The disposition that occurs in the abdomen is either great, or small, or middling.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	Of the great wounds sometimes there is exposure of the intestines or nerves of the abdomen, for which their insertion and suture are very dangerous and subtle.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And the disruption is made difficult in another way, and it is known that the reduction of them is more difficult if you do not close the insertion of them into their place at once, for they open up and are swollen so that the insertion of them is made difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And therefore the best disruption is middling, for in that one the reduction of the intestines is not difficult, just as it is difficult in both species mentioned before.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And know that the suture of the abdomen is according to four methods, but two sutures are common and convenient in suturing the other wounds of the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And two other sutures are proper to the other wounds, but however they are proper to the suture of the abdomen.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And I will tell you about each one with explanation and description.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Therefore I say that when the wound is small and there is some cause of the intestines through it, and it is difficult to reduce it, then it is one of two ways: or because the disruption is small as we have said before, or when there is inflammation of the intestines because of coldness in the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And therefore when that is so, then know that you should warm it by soaking a sponge or cloth in lukewarm water alone, or gather in squinant water, and cyperum, and spic, and embrocations over it to resolve the inflammation.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And sometimes it does this in which there is stiffness, and it is better than plain water in resolving inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And therefore when you see the inflammation resolved, then you should moisten the abdomen with water in which is steeped mallows and alder, for by that the insertion of it is eased by a little cause.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	But if it is necessary to use an instrument for this cure, then cut the hemorrhoids with a small instrument that has been sharpened.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And the first cure is better when it is not cutting and there is no need to dry it out and weaken it.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	As for the instrument, here is its form:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One end of it should be curved and sharp, the other not sharp, and the tip slender, though not as slender as a stylus, but rather blunt.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And so when the wound is enlarged and the intestine has come out, then its reduction should be according to its natural shape, in its proper place, if possible on top of it, for that is best.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	But if the hemorrhoid is large and it is in the lower part of the abdomen, then have the patient lie on his back, with his legs higher than his head; but if it is in a higher part of the abdomen, then let him lie on his side, with his head and higher leg on top.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And similarly if the hemorrhoid is on one side of the abdomen, then pay attention and consider that the side with the wound should be higher than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And so you should administer this for both large and small hemorrhoids.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And for small hemorrhoids, have ready what you have prepared, and let the minister apply it between his fingers, which should hold the hemorrhoid firmly and close its orifices, looking out for any cause of bleeding in both directions.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	And this is the common way of suturing: take the needle and thread according to the amount of the wound's amplitude; and let it go from the tip of the hemorrhoid of the little finger, and tighten the thread, making sure you do not put oil on both ends of the thread, using two fingers that are under the thread to make the other end penetrate; and you have joined two ends of the thread and two ends of the needle, and so four knots are made.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And tighten with double thread around the needle, and several times from both sides, and join together the two lips and the hemorrhoid by decent stitching; and leave the thickness of the finger, and put another needle in it, and tie that with thread as it is bound with the first needle; and do not cease doing this if it is necessary with needles until you have completed all the stitches of the wound.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And let the needles be smaller between thickness and thinness, for thin needles pierce the flesh more easily; and thick ones are difficult to use in the thread, and so for that reason let them be smaller in thickness but not in grossness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And let the needle not be put in both ends of the thread at once, lest the flesh be pierced too easily and the hemorrhoid bursts before it is healed.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And let the stitches not be prolonged so that the wound is not prohibited from healing.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And insert the ends of the needles so that they do not hurt the patient during his sleep; and spread powder on all sides over the stitches, which will hold the ends of the needles; and let them remain until you know that the wound is healed.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	And this kind of stitching with needles in whatever way is more convenient for small wounds, for it has one needle or two or around them.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	But the second stitching is common: and it is that you stitch the four ends, of the thread and two ends of the needle, in one go, with a needle in which the thread is wrapped, both thin and thick.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And when with the needle you have penetrated these four ends, reduce the needle from that lower part from which you began, so that the thread drawn back draws the upper part of the wound to the wound, so that the stitching is like a stitch in cloth with which clothes are tightened.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And leave between each stitch the thickness of the little finger.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this stitching is known to men.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And with such stitching I closed a wound which was inflicted on a man in his abdomen, and it was a wound from a knife, and the rupture of the wound was more than a palm, and it had come out around two palms from the hernia of the middle part, and the rupture was in the middle of the member; and then I reduced it after the intestine had come out through the wound for twenty-four hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the wound was healed in the space of fifteen days or around that, and I cured him, and he lived for many years, and was restored to his senses.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And other physicians had judged that he would not be healed; and by miracle I cured him with ointment, for I did not heal him with poultice nor any medicine, but I put a cotton pad over the wound twice a day and washed it often with water of honey until he was healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	But I will tell you two kinds of stitching proper according to the narration of the Word.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And it is that you begin with the thread, and insert the needle from the outside part to the inside part.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And so when the needle penetrates in the thread and in that part from which you begin, straight and throughout all the body, let the end of the needle be in the part where you have inserted it; and make the other end penetrate from the inside part to the outside in the other end of the wound.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And when you have made it penetrate, then make it penetrate another time in that end of the wound of the little finger from the outside to the inside; and let the end of the needle be in that side, and make the needle penetrate in the other end of the wound of the little finger from the inside to the outside.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And make it penetrate with that penetration with which you are making it penetrate in the needle in the end of the little finger, in the end of the needle which is in the wound until it penetrates through all of it.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And begin from that end and sew it with the end which is of the needle in the other side, and draw the needle from the thread which has penetrated, and then reduce it in that thread and sew the end of the little finger which is on the other side with that end of the needle; and draw the needle from the thread which is of the part of him.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And do that once and again, and do that once and another time until you sew all that is outside according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the sum of this way of stitching is that you sew with skin stitching, just as you sew the skin, so that you sew the hernia one time from the end of the thread, and let it remain until you have completed it.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	But the second proper stitching which I teach Gualia, and it is of wound of man and by him recomposed, is that you sew it according to similarity, just as other physicians sew it, in that they join all parts to him conveniently by nature; and apply one end to another end of him, and that is done according to how I have recomposed.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	Let the needle be in the end of the little finger at your side from the outside to the inside, and make it penetrate to the inside to the outside in two ends of the hernia; and then turn the needle and make it penetrate from the outside to the inside in two ends of the wound.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	Then return those bones to their original position, and ensure that some of the bones inside line up with the corresponding bones on the outside at both ends of the fractured area, specifically those on the opposite side.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	This stitching method is better than common stitching, and it is the stitching for which I gave instructions earlier.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the speech of Gualia:
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And some say that stomach stitching is done with two needles; you should insert one needle into each wound and then bring the needles together from opposite sides of the wound, just as you would stitch clothes.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And know that when there is a rupture in the middle of the abdomen, then stitching it is more difficult than stitching other places in the abdomen.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	But the treatment of plague is judged based on the other plagues.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	The cause is that when you encounter a fresh plague with its blood showing through the skin, and you reduce the hernia and warm it up and dress it appropriately, then apply an embrocation powder to it.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already affected the plague, then apply some unguent to it that you have at hand, one which hardens like stone and closes up the wounds; then dress it as you would any other plague until it is healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	But if you do not have the medicines with you, then apply it immediately, for as soon as it begins to ooze pus and is changed from time to time during the day, two or three times a day, depending on your instruction, until it is healed; for in many cases simple plagues are cured without any other treatment.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	But if you fear that the plague will spread to the main limbs, then soak lion wool in warm or lukewarm oil and apply it around the area between the ankles and below the knees.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if he feels pain or putrefaction in his intestines, for as many times as that happens to him, he should anoint that with black styptic tea, especially if the putrefaction is caused by an intestinal hernia and there is a penetrating exit wound from it.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And know that the treatment for a hernia of the large intestine is easier than that of the small intestine.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And it is more difficult to heal because the intestine called the "duodenum" does not receive healing from any plague that occurs in it due to the great multitude of veins that are in it and due to its size compared to those, and due to the subtlety of its body and its proximity to nerve nature.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	But if what proceeds from the plague is pus and you obtain it recently, then reduce it according to your ability by which you warm the intestines equally.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	But if it has moved on and is already black or green, then press that with a needle over the place where it is blackened, so that blood flow may result from it, for in the cloth there are veins and arteries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	Then insert that which is opposite to it and place two ends of the needle at the end below the plague, so that on you there may be a pull away from it because of the attraction of the cloth and an emission of pus from the plague.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Instructions for plagues that occur in the intestine:
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When a rupture occurs in the intestine and it is small, then it is possible that it may be restored in some people; for he had experienced a plague in his abdomen with piercing by a lance, and the plague was on the right side of the stomach, and the plague was ancient and had become a fistula, and he discharged pus from it and went about.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Therefore, when I pursued the cure of him, he was not confident in his healing, but he continued to treat it subtly until it healed and the wound was solidified.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And he saw that the wound was already solidified, he took care of himself who had suffered an accident in his abdomen; and he did not suffer from any accidents due to that ill accident, and he resumed his usual activities eating and drinking, and he bathed and exercised his limbs.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And some experienced people say that when there is a plague in the intestine and it is small, then you should tie it according to this manner: and take two pieces of garlic; then press the two lips of the plague and place one of those garlics whose mouth is open over the two lips of the plague; then when he takes it into his mouth and tightens his mouth, cut off its head, for it will adhere and not be dissolved.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	Then place another garlic near the first one, and do not cease to do this with garlics one after another according to the amount of the whole plague.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	Then reduce it and cook the plague; and let those caps remain attached to the intestine until the intestine is healed; and let no harm come to him.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the intestine may be tied with a very thin thread made from an animal's intestine, for it is put on a needle; and you take the ends of those intestinal threads, and let it be somewhat peeled, and then tie its end with thread, wrapped around, and then insert that thread and cook it in the rupture.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this method of stitching with garlics is nothing but a way of faith and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	But if the plague is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the small intestines, for then there is only subtle treatment and not complete healing.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	Instructions for a hernia and fistula:
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	Know that any plague or abscess, when it becomes old and turns into an ulcer and is not solidified and discharges pus all the time and is not healed, then in any limb it may be, universally it is called a hernia and we call it azucem.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And a hernia according to truth is a knotted vein that is hard and white with which there is no pain and to which a cavity occurs just as it does in the cavity of a tooth; and because of this it is called a nodule, that is, a tooth.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And it is moist in some people, and discharges pus; and when the moisture is strong, then it is cut off within a few hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And sometimes this moisture is great, and sometimes it is small, and sometimes it is thick, and sometimes it is subtle.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And I have already mentioned in the division that when I discuss plagues, any ulcer that is not healed or is not naked flesh but one of six causes: one is because of lack of blood in the body; or because of wickedness; or because between it and its lips there is hard flesh prohibiting the birth of new flesh; or because it is from increased growth; or because the matter that is within it is of poor quality; or because the medicine is unsuitable for its healing; or when corruption occurs in the region, and it is pestilential; or because property of the region, just as it happens in Saragossa, where there is difficult digestion of illnesses, and healing of the abscess is delayed by nature; or because in it there is a bone, or many bones.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	Now I have shown all those causes and their signs and the cure of them with medicines in the division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	Now, let me tell you about the cure for a hernia that is made through an operation with my medicine.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body; some of these are fistulas that come to the large veins and arteries, or the nerves, or the brain, or the intestine, or the bladder, or any of the ribs, or any of the vertebrae of the back, or any of the compound joints such as those of the hand and foot.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And therefore of these fistulas which are according to this manner are of the illnesses that are difficult to cure and do not receive treatment; occupation with them is labor and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if it is one of the fistulas that its depth does not come to those places I have mentioned and you hope for a cure of it and wish to attain knowledge of it then take a probe made of iron or steel; if the fistula goes straight, probe for it by means of this.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	But if the fistula is twisted then investigate it with a probe of fine lead for lead due to the lightness of its substance is bent and drawn out from the twist.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula has horrifying movements then it is not possible for you to indicate it with a probe.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Then, enema the orifice for its orifices because the moisture by which you enema it goes through other orifices and runs from them.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And then inquire closely according to what manner it is possible for you to know whether there is bone or nerve; and if the cavity of the fistula is distant or near; and if it is a fistula whose orifices are all at one place and this is above all by the sum of your strength, by your inquiry, by which you inquire of the patient, and the invention of the pain from your compression with the hand over the area, and likewise of the significances and of the accidental causes.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have stood over all these causes with verity then go to the cure according to confidence: and it is for you to consider then if the fistula is apparent near or in a salty place, distant from joint, or from nerve, or artery, or vein, or of one of the places which I have told to you.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then you dry the fistula according to what is said before of its narration and prevent that which is in that filtration and of corrupted flesh, and that which is born in the orifices of the flesh or of the nail and similar, and cure it within until it is healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	But if the fistula is of great depth and is straight then you should think to insert it into the fistula as far as possible and then cleanse that of all its corrupted flesh; then administer hot water-droppings wrapped in sharp medicines and insert these into the cavity of the fistula which you have understood with iron.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And do that several times until the sharp medicine corrodes all that is broken in the cavity of the fistula from corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	Then restore it with ointments which produce healthy flesh within it until it is healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	But if it is not healed by that then you cauterize it according to what we have recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	But if the cause of the fistula is bone and this is certified by you then you inquire it and dry it according to what we have said, unless you prohibit any cause from vein or nerve or main member as I have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is uncovered and there is in it corruption and blackness then you cut that away until all the corruption is gone; then cure it with that which makes flesh within it until it is healed.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it is not healed and the nerve as before then know that you have not come to the total eradication of the corruption; then uncover it again and secondarily do the reason for it and the cleansing of it with your utmost strength and then restore it.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And therefore if it is healed then it is well and if not then know that the corruption is in the great depth of the body which has not been reached and therefore to you there is nothing to do but to leave it.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the corrupted bone is small or it is possible for you to pull it out then you pull it with delicate pincers which are appropriate for that.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if there are several bones then you carefully do the extraction of all those and of none do you leave any cause with your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	But if any cause of the moisture makes you contrary and in their beginning there is no fear nor mistake then insert that laments or flesh if they are there and loosen the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	But if it is not prepared for you to loosen the bones from that time then pause over the wound what will cause the wound to suppurate and leave that in order that what is around those bones of flesh and of laments and guard the wound so that it not be consolidated and the section which you have cut in your operation is constrained.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	Have you fear, pause over it a clot submerged in supertincture of oil or a clot submerged in Egyptian ointment or in one of the green ointments for when those laments suppurate and the bones are separated from them by ablation and from those there is drawn off.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	But if it is a large bone like the bone of the leg or of the thigh or similar and that which is corrupted is only its face then cut that away with resection so far back that the blackness and corruption are removed and then restore the wound.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	But if that which is corrupted is a great part and the corruption has already come to the marrow of the bone then it is a necessary cause to close it up and to cut it all through into the area where the corruption has come and then cure it until it is consolidated.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I have recommended to you that in a man’s thigh let it be applied as example and assistant to your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	A young man about 30 years of age to whom happened pain in his thigh and from the parts within the jaw was over the matter within the body where the matter came to the jaw and it is matter of pus with great pus and there was not to him any extrinsic cause.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And then the time was prolonged by that through the error of the doctors until the pus was opened and matters came from it much and its cure was paused until the leg was fistulated and in it were made many orifices all of which discharged putrid matter and humors of the body.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And then he was cured by many doctors around two years and there was not in them understanding but in the leg was pain as before when I was called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And I saw his leg and the matters which ran from him those orifices by a great body and indeed that man’s body was all swollen and its color was yellow.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then I inserted the probe into one of those orifices and reached the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And then I probed and searched all the orifices and found that they came from all parts of the leg.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then I cut and inserted into one of the orifices where I discovered a part of the bone and found it corrupted and indeed was rotten and blackened; and was already corrupted a part of the leg where it had penetrated into the membrane.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then I drew out that which to me was revealed and prepared from the uncovered bone.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And I saw that it was not in the bone but that corruption which I had removed and indeed I had already cut away.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And then pursue the restoration of the plague with consolidative medicine for a long time, and it is not consolidated.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And then I iterated and uncovered the second bone from the first discovery, and found continuous corruption in the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And I observed what appeared to me from that corruption, and then I found it necessary to perform the cure and restoration of it, but it was not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then I discovered another wound in it and did not cease to cut the small bone little by little particularly and to explore its restoration, but it was not restored until I had cut around a palm of it, and extracted that with its marrow, and then I restored that one with medicines, and it was slightly consolidated and healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And it was not necessary to iterate the operation and incision on it except for the disposition of its vein and due to the weakness of its tolerance and fear of death, because fatigue afflicted him at all times from excessive evacuation syncope.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And then he healed entirely, and there is nothing in the place of hard bone; and his disposition in his body was improved and his strength returned; and he regained his usual dispositions and did not suffer any impediment in walking or any injury from any cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	But if an outstanding bone is to be cut from the body, then you should proceed with that second in this manner: you should take a ligament and tighten it at the end of the prominent bone, and instruct someone to pull that end away from you; and place that thicker woolen ligament over the meat below the bone, and extend the end of it so as to draw the meat away from what is below, and uncover the meat over the area which you wish to cut so that the saw does not injure the meat.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And place a stake or board below the bone properly, for when you do that it is not prohibited for the saw to cut into the corrupted meat.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And you should saw it on the corrupted area little by little, for if there is corruption in the cavity of the bone and it does not appear on its appearance to the sense, then force another cut on it.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is corrupted and not prominent, then there is one side continuous with the other, and the corruption is in its middle or in part of it, then you uncover the meat on all sides entirely; and then place a stake below it, and then saw that from the first cut where the corruption is until the saw is continued into the other cut.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And let the sawing be according to the location of the corruption a little, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is in the joint, cut that corrupted joint and saw the bone where it continues to the other side.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption extends into two joints then there is no reason in that.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the palm of the hand or foot it is very difficult; however you should inquire into the corruption as to how it appears to you, and cut that open, and treat that according to whatever disposition is possible for you, and with whatever means rectifies that for you, provided it does not hurt a vein or nerve.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And know that the cutting and saws for cutting these bones are very different according to the situation of the bones, and their preparation, thickness, subtlety, magnitude and smallness, hardness and rarity; so that when you prepare for any kind of operation you have a convenient tool for that operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And know that that operation informs you about the kind of tool for which you are in need; when you have great skill and long and intimate knowledge of the ways of this art, and experience with diseases, because then you will have by yourself what is convenient for all tools in every disease.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And now I shall tell you at the end of this chapter the number of instruments which you will use with simples, with which you will proceed to your prohibition, which you will experience concerning the others.
Forma de serra:	Form of saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another saw:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Form of another great saw:
Forma de ray:	Form of a razor:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	Let the head of this razor be according to the form of a star-shaped key, and its points according to the shape of the points of a steelyard.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And it does not concern unless with that there are ground the heads of the joints when they are corrupted, or it is a large mouth wide open.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Form of a larger razor than the others:
Forma de razori menor:	Form of a smaller razor:
Forma de razori lat:	Form of a broad razor:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Form of another saw properly made: let it be made with an arch of the most superior part and the sharpness of iron, and its handle of a wooden dagger properly made.
Forma de lu:	Its form:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Form of a razor in which there is a cavity:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Form of another subtle razor:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Form of another razor with a curved end:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Form of a small razor resembling a tent:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Form of an incisor with which bones are cut:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Form of another smaller incisor:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Form of another incisor; this one resembling a razor, and its end is like a saw, and it is displayed in many locations in the bones:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Form of a razor which suits the piercing of bones:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And its end is triangular and of acute extremity.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	And it is made of Indian iron, and similarly all the causes we have said of razors and of incissors and saws.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	Of cutting ends and of the sawing of bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The ends become swollen or due to an intrinsic cause or an extrinsic one, or when you have treated that corruption with those medicines and the treatment does not confer, or when the corruption goes away from the member which has not been cut for any reason, then you should cut that member where the corruption is located, in order that the patient escapes by death or wickedness, which is a greater defect of the member.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the sign of that to which it happens is that the member becomes black when it is cooked that fire has scorched it, or it swells soon the darkness within that the burning, then bind that with an incision of that.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And similarly if the cause of the corruption is a blow from some venomous causes like that of scorpion stings or of a snake or of a centipede or of similar ones.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or the blow is in the end of the finger then you should cut the finger and do not give space to the corruption that it goes into the hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And similarly if it affects the hand then you should cut that from the knuckle of the firebone, and do not give space to the corruption so that it goes into the firebone of the arm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if instead you cut the arm within the cuff in the joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if another corruption goes and turns around the cuff then there is the death of the patient; and add another cause in treatment it is amount of virtue.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And similarly cut the foot when corruption happens instead of the toe of the foot then you should cut that within one of the toes.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if it is taken in the leg, then you should cut into the entire leg.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	But if it goes into the groin, then you should cut into the leg up to the joint of the groin.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if the decay has already reached the groin, then there is nothing to do but to release the patient and let him die.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	And the way of cutting or binding a member is that you should tighten the ligament at the part lowest where you want to cut, and tighten another ligament above the location; and extend one ligament to the parts below, and extend another ligament above it; and separate the meat which lies between two ligaments so that there be exposed all of the flesh; and then let it be cut or bound.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And cover that which is bound with linen cloth from all sides so that it does not touch the wound, and let the patient have a poultice of boiled linseed, and let the wound be cauterized.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	But if blood flow happens when you operate, then you should cauterize the wound carefully or place upon it some powders that constrict the flow of blood; and then return to your treatment until it is complete.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then ligate the wounded member in a way convenient, and cure it until it is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And he also told me of an incident that happened to a man in his foot, the same accident which I and he recounted, which is that it turned black on him in his foot due to a scorching that was like fire burning.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that decay occurred first in his toe, spreading throughout the entire foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that man prepared remedies for himself before he went to see the doctor, the vehemence of his pain and burning increasing; so he cut off that foot at the joint, and it healed.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	That man had that decay in the toe of his hand for a long time.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then he came to me and requested that I reflect upon that excess of medicine which had been applied to his hand, so that the cleansing of his body might be accomplished; and if the excess is not reflected and begins to go into the other toe, it will begin in his hand.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And he implored me to cut off his hand, and I would not do so hoping for the reflection of that excess, but fearing that the cutting off of his hand might result in death, for the strength of the patient was great.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And when he despaired of me, he returned to his own land and it happened that the man prepared and cut off his entire hand, and healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I have not added this narrative except that it be an assistant for whoever suffers from this disease and that it be a sign by which they are recognized and how they are treated.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	Of the cure of sores and the quality of enemas with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When there is an abscess in some fleshy member and the space of the abscess is prolonged so that it forms a collection of pus, and then it is broken and perforated, and the pus is discharged from it, and the place is hollow as if it were a vessel, and the membrane which is above it with a thin cloth, and there has not arrived at further decay, and it does not press upon the bone or nerve or ligament, it is called a sinus, and is not named a fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	But if the space is prolonged so that the decay infiltrates some member, then it is called a fistula and not a sinus.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And the cure for it is that you cut off all of that membrane as it is rolled up and more so when it is thinned out and done with a cloth, and that you do not let it adhere to the location by its decay.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	But if you fear that the membrane might adhere and that decay has not been accomplished through subsequent consequence, and the membrane is hollowed out on its face, then you should cure it with enemas.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And it is that you consider the sinus and if it is large and the membrane that you see has a foul odor, then cleanse that sinus with Egyptian medicine which is of oil and sour wine and honey received in equal parts, and they are poured into a vessel and boiled over the fire until it becomes like honey.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And then take from it what is necessary and dissolve it with water and honey; and cleanse it with that sinus, and tighten the orifice of it, and let the medicine remain in there for the quantity of two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And then extract that with caution, and do this for several days until the sinus is cleansed and the odor eliminated.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And sometimes it is cleansed with water of ashes when that medicine is not available to you; and it is that you take the ashes of wood, and put upon it water, and then strain that and cleanse that sinus with it until you are convinced that the sinus has been cleared.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the patient has no tolerance for Egyptian medicine nor ash water, then cleanse it with water and honey mixed with ground-up honey, for honey cleanses and washes, and wine makes the sinus adhere more especially when there is excess of dryness and stinging.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you have done this several times and are convinced that the sinus is cleansed, then cleanse it with that which makes the flesh grow on it.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And it is that you take the medicine called diafinicon and dissolve that with oil of roses and stinging wine; or that you cleanse that sinus with some medicines and other unguents which have the properties which I have already written in the treatment of the unguents.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the orifice of the sinus is narrow and the cannula of the enema cannot be received, then you should enlarge that with a small iron tool little by little, and put into it a sponge wrapped in Egyptian unguent or in basil unguent until it is enlarged.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And likewise if the orifice is wide, then you should draw in the edges of it with a stitch and leave in there the quantity in which the enema is added to it.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the orifice from which the membrane hangs down is elevated to the parts above it, then dry that in the pus-filled location beneath it so that the membrane is generated in there because when the membrane is constricted in the sinus the flesh is generated in there.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if you are unable to dry it within the bone of the pus-filled location beneath it according to what you want, then be assured that you prepare the member with preparation by which the membrane hangs down loosely according to how you have perceived it and so that nothing in there retains the membrane.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And take medicines that are solidifying which are placed over the sinus conveniently according to what you want so that they extend those upon thin linen cloth.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And let the linen cloth be of such great quantity as to make contact with all the sinus; and then cut off with the forceps on the right of the orifice of the sinus a wound more ample a little than the orifice of the sinus, and then extend over another linen cloth of the unguents of lions according to the quantity of the wound, and place that upon it in such distant position from the orifice of the sinus so that the discharge of the membrane be removed from there and not press upon the linen cloth a great deal but after some days once.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	And that which is upon the orifice of the sinus and which dries up every hour because it exudes what is constricted in there of the membrane.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	So that you can tell if what comes out of his arm is blood or pus, or is digested or undigested.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And also consider the location of that vein, whether it hurts in that spot, and if there is an abscess there.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And after your treatment has been going on for some time in this way, and you see that matter coming out from the opening of the vein that has become attached or is sticking to it, then on the third day you loosen it, and when you loosen the dressing, then change the cloth with a new one and renew the ointment.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	But if the vein is too deep for you to see the virus subtil, then do not be desperate about the adhesion of it, because its healing is just right, because there are some people in whom the generation of flesh happens slowly under their dressing, and there are some whose opposite happens.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if after many days the arm is not digested, then you should know that the vein has not become attached; and if its adhesion is delayed and it becomes the prolonged cause, then you should put it in the exsiccation of medicines, and if the medicines are moist in their substance and in their power, they are dried like a dyaphoretic ointment, when there is added excess of white vitriol.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the best way to cure it is that you take a dyaphoretic ointment and dissolve it in rose oil, and put vinegar with it in its substance, and then comfort it with it, and use it.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And when there is no arm, then you take the dyaphoretic ointment, mix it with honey and use it when it is cooked until it thickens; or you take myrrh and aloe and cook them together, and triturate both until they are powdered over the honey that has been cooked over the fire, and spread this on a cloth, and put the cloth on the vein; and you powder that which you have cooked with honey over a cloth, and spread it on.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And some times it is administered with a long aristology of celestial lily (which is the lily celestial) and thistles of the earth and centaurea, and you use these simples or adjust them, triturate them, sieve and powder them over the honey that I have recommended; and use it.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the vein is prolonged and not healed by this treatment, then you should know that corruption is in its depth, and it already makes inquiry into the bones or other hard parts or to the tendons; then you treat it with a fistular treatment, as above is said.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	About the treatment of panaric and worn nail and added cutting of the finger and section.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Panaric is an abscess which forms under the fingernail of the finger of the hand or of the foot, and it usually occurs in other fingers, and when it is prolonged and its cure is less valued, then it is an abscess of cauterized abscess, or is putrefied, and it causes a wound between the roots of the nail, and it rots very much, and its corruption goes to the bone inside which has a foul odor, and the extremity of the finger becomes lopsided, and its color becomes brown.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And so when you have this which we have said in the division and do not comfort your cure, then you should know that you pierce all the superfluity that has been rotted from the nail and then cauterize the wound there with iron, because hot cautery is beneficial in it.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is healthy and the nail is healed, and the parts of the nail are pressed together by the flesh to the joints within, and they begin to sting and hurt it, then you should know that you put a thin ray below the angle of the nail which pricks the flesh, and push it upwards and cut that flesh with ease, and put on that which comes from the flesh of the corrosive medicines until all is removed; and then cure it with ointments until it is healed.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	But if the corruption has already entered into the bone, then you pierce that bone and extract it, because it will never be healed as long as there is a腐了骨。
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you see the rot and corruption going into the finger, then you pierce it in one of its joints according to which is pressed by memory, and then cure that until it is healed.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	But if the nail is struck or hit, and it feels violent pain afterwards, then you should know that you should begin by bleeding the patient, and then dry the nail with a sharp spatulum, making a transverse cut on it above, and be careful that the cut does not go into the flesh under the nail, because you will cause violent pain to the patient, and so will cause the generation of superfluous flesh in that spot; and then cure that spot with something that gives relief from pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	But a finger joint which is born in the hands of some people is very fleshly, and it is very bone, or it is very nail.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And some are born in the root of the joint, or its birth is in some joints of the fingers.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	But that which is born in some joints of the finger is not harmed, but that which is born in the joints is very harmed.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And of those which are born fleshy, the cut is easier, and it is that you pierce that behind its roots with a broad spatula.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	But of that which is born in the root of the joint, the cure is difficult; and so beware of its incision.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But in that which is born in the finger between the joints, you should know that at the beginning you pierce the flesh of it with a round incision into the bone, and then cut with one of those convenient saws for it, and then cure it until it is healed.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	But hardening which happens to the fingers between their joints many times or by birth of man who is born in them, or by hardening of plague or by burning fire, or likewise, therefore you dry that hardening until the fingers return to their natural shape.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And then spread between their bandages which are soaked in rose oil so that they are not hardened easily, and separate between them or place between them a thin sheet of lead according to what is proper.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And likewise if hardening happens in some fingers with the palm, then you dry that hardening according to how it is prepared and suits the shape of the member.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	Of an incision of wounds, thus are varices.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Varices are thus, and so are thick wrapped veins full of melencolic superfluities which come in movements of the parts of the body, and their greatest occurrence is in the legs, and most of all in the legs of travelers and workers and carriers.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Therefore you should administer a purgation of the body from black cholera several times with strong expulsion, and then let the patient bleed from the basilic vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	But their cure by iron is according to two manners: the one is that it is pierced and that black blood is drawn, and the other manner is that the vein is elevated and all of it is extracted.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	Its cut is according to this manner: at the beginning moisten the leg with hot water until the gross blood is dissolved, which is feculent of the leg, and then tighten the leg of the patient at the part above the pus-superior of the thigh to the part below the pubic bone by a bandage, and then dry the vein in one spot, or two, or three with broad cuts, and then elevate the black blood with his own hand from the part below the leg up inside until he has come out the quantity that you want and that he can bear, and which tolerates the vertue of the patient.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And then tie it up, and command him to abstain from foods that generate black bile.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And repeat the treatment by phlebotomy when the veins are filled and it is noticed in the patient.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	But the elevation of them is according to this manner: you raise the leg of the patient, if in him there are veins, and then put him into a bath and embrocate his leg with hot water until it reddens and the veins become prominent; or that he be exercised by vigorous exercise, if a bath is not at hand, until the member becomes warm.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And then cut off the thread on the side of the vein either in the long or behind him, depending on where the pain is, or in the lowest part of him, depending on where the foot is.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And then open the thread with tweezers and scrape the vein all around until it appears to feeling, and the appearance of it that you see turns black.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And when you have finished with the thread, you will see that it has turned white as a cord.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And then you put down that which is beneath the thread so that it is elevated and is dripped from the thread, and suspend it with a silk thread.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	And then cut another section below that section with three fingers, and scrape the thread from the top of the vein until it appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	And then elevate that and insert it into the second section behind the foot, and extract it from the section that is above that.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And do this until you extract it from the section that is highest or highest of all the sections, so that all are extracted; and then insert it.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if he does not obey you and extract and elevate it, then insert a strong bent needle and thread that and extract it, or insert it underneath the leg and rotate your hand all around so that it is dripped.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And be careful that it is not cut, for if it is broken, it is difficult for you to elevate that vein and it has come upon the patient through that harm.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when all of it has been completely dripped out, then put over the site of the wound wool soaked in wine and rose oil, and cure that until it is healed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the vein is contracted having tortuosity at which is wrapping around the parts, and it is not according to rectitude as we have said, then know that you must split that all along its tortuosity, and suspend it with tweezers until you elevate it all.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And be careful that you do not cut the vein and harm it, for it will be difficult for you to elevate it; and use your discretion in that.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	The shape of the incision with which the vein is dried:
Forma de unci orp:	The shape of a silk thread:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not cut with tweezers nor does it have a sharp end so that it does not harm the vein; and it has great flexibility, for if it were subtle, it would cut the vein due to its subtlety; it has in it superfluous thickness as we have said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	On drawing of the vein of the leg:
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is generated in the legs in warm lands as in Al-Ateji in the land of Arabs and in the warm and arid lands of India with little tenderness, and in which there is no grass nor herb.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And it is also generated in other parts of the body other than the legs.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And its generation is from putrefaction that comes underneath the thread as venoms of serpents and worms and maggots and worms generated between the thread and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	And the sign of the coming of it is from this vein that happens in the leg a violent inflammation; and then the site is blistered; and then the vein begins to emerge from the site of that blister which seems like a plant root.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And then when you see the end of it, you should wrap around it a piece of lead weighing as much as a drachma and hang it from their leg.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And as many times as you see it some cause to the parts outside, wrap that in lead and tie it.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if it is prolonged, then you insert a part of it and wrap the rest; and do not cut that which is rooted so that it is completely extracted, for if you cut it, it will contract and go inside the flesh and cause an abscess and swelling in the site and a bad ulcer.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	So that it may be drawn out gradually and extracted little by little so that it is dripped from the back of him and does not cause harm in him any longer in the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And from this vein it is found in some men that which is in its length of 20 palms and I have seen one of 30 palms.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is cut in the hour of its medicine, then insert the thread into the vein of him and pierce it with a long piercing through the body so that all that is in the matter is evacuated, and administer putrefaction of the site for several days with medicines; and then cure that with the cure of ulcers.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein sometimes has caused bumps, and mostly when it appears in the joint of the foot or in the foot, and it comes to him bumps orifices, and is generated from each orifice ram.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And therefore cure that as we have said in the division and with that which is above it.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	Of a section under worms generated below the skin and is called bovine illness.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This illness is named in some land due to a disease of cows because sometimes it happens to them and is called bovine illness because there are worms one of which is generated between the thread and the flesh, and goes throughout all the body, and it appears to feeling due to its motion from member to member so that it breaks the thread and drips out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And its generation is from putrefaction of some humors as happens with worms and serpents and roundworms in the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is feared for its malice, for when it goes in the body and is elevated to the head, then it causes a strong ache and enters and destroys the brain, and from that sometimes it happens.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And therefore when you want to cure him and extract it, then do not if he does not feel the pain of it and appear to him to walk and show up to him; and then know that you must tie that which is over him and that which is under him with a ligature and constrict it strongly, and then cut it off and extract it.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is stuck in the flesh and does not go out to you, then put cautery with fire over the site where it lives, and the greater cause that is feared is corruption of it as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	And if you see it come to the head near the brain, then bind over the eyebrow with a strong binding, and cut it off and extract it; and know that the patient abstains from purifying his body of bad putrefied humors.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	Of a section on a cold illness.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This illness is named in our land nifer, and it is an ache that comes in some members, and then it is transferred from member to member.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And I have already seen that according to how you will count them.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	And it was called to a woman ill a village, and he discovered her arm and saw a small inflammation in the vein of the arm, and when it came for an hour, he saw that inflammation go as if it were silver when it moved from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then go to the pain in that place and fix it in the muscle, and stay here for an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	Then walk around the rest of the body until you reach the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	Then I followed him as he moved around the whole body, and I was amazed at his transformation and the speed with which he moved from one member to another.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	I had seen this before in my own body, but I have also seen pains that travel from one limb to another.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	But I have not seen it happen to the female body.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I did not think it was because of this that the woman was old, but because her body and veins were exposed, and in this case the moving air appeared to the sense as a wind.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that this does not appear due to this back-cure in those who are delicate and have humid bodies with hidden veins.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And when you want to cure him, and the patient feels that pain, then it is not for you to appear in the way we have said, but you should press on him strongly and then release him quickly and put your hand over the area where the wind has been cut off, and cauterize the spot.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	But if you do not see it with your own eyes, then you should cure him by emptying the body and by driving out the winds, and those cramps with foul-smelling pills, and with Serapium pills and similar things.
De extraccio de sagetas.	By removing arrows.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrows are diverse according to their species, and according to the parts of the body where they are found, because their diversity is that some have great points, and small, and concaves, and blind, but others are hollow; and some have three angles, while others have tongues, and still others are like stars.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And they are according to the parts and the bones in which they are found according to two ways: for some parts are principal causal parts, like the brain, heart, liver, lung, intestines, bladder, and their likes; therefore when you find one of these parts and sense a sign of death, which I will recount soon, then you should avoid extracting that arrow from those in whom the signs presage death, and when you do not see these ill omens and the arrow is not buried deep in the part, then you should extract it and heal the wound.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And the signs of the brain are when you find an arrow in it and it pierces the bone and is stuck in the sphenoid bone which is above the brain, because then occurs violent vomiting and scotomata, and vertigo, and heat in the body, and inflammation and heat in the tongue, and spasms and confusion of the mind and vomiting of bile, and the voice is very hoarse and the speech is destroyed, and there is exudation of white humidity like powder from the wound site, and the eyes look like they are filled with water.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	Therefore, if these signs appear to you, then you should abstain from curing and extracting the arrow unless it is stuck in the body.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	But the signs of the arrow when it pierces the heart are that it is near the left mammilla, and feels like it is stuck in a hard cause, and it is not a soft cause; and the movement of the arrow is very similar to the movement of the pulse, and black blood flows from the wound, and there is frostiness on the extremities, and sweating coldness, and syncope; therefore know that death is approaching quickly.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And the signs when the arrow has pierced the lung are exudation of frothy blood from the wound, and the vessels near the neck are swollen, and the color of the patient changes, and they exhale a great amount of spirit, and demand frequent breathing.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the arrow pierces the membrane which is in the foot, then the pain will be near the small ribs, and there will be a great wound made with violent pain and sighing, and not all the members of the muscles are affected.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if the arrow pierces the stomach, then you will see the wound vomit up some undigested food.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if the arrow pierces the belly and is stuck in it, you will see a wound, or split tissue, or intestine which has been torn, and there is no hope for curing him by extracting the arrow.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the arrow pierces the bladder and the urine flows out, and some cause processes from the parts outside, and there is strong pain in the body, then know that it is mortal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	But the other parts like the face, neck, collarbone, shoulders, vertebrae of the back, breastbone, groin, hip, and their likes of the limbs, are saved according to the best outcome when the arrow does not pierce a vein or artery and is not a poisonous arrow.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I will recount this to you that I have seen from the nature of these arrows so that you may understand through it about your cure.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The cause is that in a man who had an arrow shot into his lacrimal gland of the eye in the root of the nose, when I extracted it from the other side, after releasing the muscles of his cheek, he was healed and did not suffer harm to the eye.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And I extracted another arrow from a Jew who had it shot into his eye in the muscle of the eyelid, after the eyebrow, and the arrow was already concealed and not obtained from that except for a small extremity with which it adhered to his stalk, and it was a great arrow of the acute arrows of the Turks, with lion-wrought iron in which there were no eyebrows.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And the Jew was healed, and did not suffer harm to his eye from that ill event.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And I extracted another arrow from a Christian who had it shot into his collarbone, and it was an Arabic arrow, and it was the one to which the eyebrows belonged; then I inserted it between two fingers, and it was already submerged in his collarbone; then I made it subtle with that, and I extracted it, and the Christian was healed.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And I extracted another arrow from a man who had it shot into his belly, and I thought that he would die from it; then, after thirty days had passed and there was not changed upon him any cause of his disposition, I inserted it and twisted it, and he was healed, and did not suffer harm to him from that ill event.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And I saw a man in whom an arrow was shot into his back, and the wound was healed over him, and after fire had been applied closely for seven years, the arrow was stuck in the root of the groin.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And I saw a woman who had an arrow shot into her belly, and the wound was healed over her, and she did not change in her dispositions in the least, and the woman did not suffer harm in any of her natural functions.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And I saw another man in whom an arrow was shot into his face and the wound was healed, but the arrow was not removed, causing no motion of pain, and similar things to these.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And I extracted the arrow from the man of the king's prince who had it shot into the smallest part of his nose, and he had already turned slightly to the right, and the whole arrow was concealed.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And I was called to cure him before the extraction of the arrow three days later.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	I then found the wound of the arrow very tight; and then I probed it with a subtle probe, and did not feel anything there; but he felt a puncturing pain below the right ear, and then I believed that this puncturing was caused by the tip of the arrow.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And I plastered the location with an ointment containing attractive and digestive virtues, confident that this would dry up the wound and make it appear to me so that I could extract the arrow.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And I did not see any significant accident in the location where the arrow had pierced; and I continued to apply the ointment for many days, and no accident happened; but as the wound healed little by little, and the patient was relieved from his pain due to extraction over a period of several days, one day he felt the arrow tip within his nose, and he recognized this to me.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then I applied a sharp and corrosive medicine to the wound for several days until pus appeared, and probing it with a probe, I found the tip of the arrow, which was adhering to the shaft.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And then I carefully examined the wound with that sharp medicine until the tip of the arrow appeared visible to me, and it took me some time with this treatment over a period of four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And then as the wound enlarged, and it was possible for me to insert forceps into it without any obstruction, I did not cease probing and manipulating it with various instruments, until one day I began to manipulate it with specially-made forceps, according to which you will find the form of these in the end of the chapter, and I extracted it; and then I restored that wound.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And some doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose was not restored, and I restored it, and the wound healed completely, and the patient recovered entirely without any residue.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I recommend to you the quality of extraction of some arrows for which you should apply this rule and significance to what I have not said, because the parts of this art and the definitions of that are not comprehended by narration or understanding of the book.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the wise artisans compare a few things about motion; and what is present to what is absent, and they find new operations and novel instruments the descent of strange causes of the art when it occurs.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And therefore I say that arrows are not withdrawn from the parts in which they are placed, but according to two ways, either by attraction of the location in which they enter, or by the contrary of the other part.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is driven by the location from where it entered is an arrow proceeding in a fleshy location, and is thrown and withdrawn.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if it does not obey the exit at the time in which it strikes, then you should leave it for a few days until the flesh around it becomes callused and the attraction of it and its exit are alleviated.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	And similarly if it is lodged in the bone and does not obey you to exit, then leave it for a few days and repeat that with attraction and motion every day, and it will be withdrawn.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if it does not obey you after a few days, then you should bore into the circumference of the arrow in that bone all around with a subtle tool until the location is enlarged by the arrow, and then extract it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the arrow is lodged in the bone of the head and has already progressed into one of the ventricles of the brain, and appears in the patient some of those accidents which I have mentioned, then abstain from extracting the arrow and leave it for several days until his being is equilibrated; because if the arrow pierces the brain, then death is not prolonged.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrow is not lodged but only in the core of the bone and does not pass within to the brain, and the patient remains for several days without any cause of those accidents happening to him, then you should manipulate both the attraction of the arrow and of him.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	But if it is driven in and does not obey extraction, then you should introduce borings into the circumference of the arrow as we have recommended, and then heal the location until it is restored.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	But if the arrow is already buried in the location of the body and is buried from sensation, then you should probe it with a probe, and if you feel that, then throw it out with some tools which are convenient to its attraction.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot act upon it due to the constriction of the wound and because of the length of the bone, and there is no bone or nerve or vein there, then you should open the wound until it is enlarged and it is possible to extract the arrow.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if it is held by the ears through which it is gripped, then you should loosen the flesh in which it is lodged all around with every tool that you can use; and manipulate it if you cannot act upon the opening of the flesh at the fracture of the ears and in twisting them until he obeys.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in whatever location it is in, then you should use twisting of your hand with forceps at all parts until it obeys; and probe it with a subtle probe so that the arrow is not broken and so that you have difficulty extracting it and it has difficulty being extracted.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot act upon it in your hour, then leave it for a few days until the parts which are around it become callused, and then repeat that because by then it will be alleviated.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	But if you meet with contrary flow of blood, then you should administer what we have said about healing in its chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And guard your virtue from cutting of vein or nerve, or tendon, and manipulate it in every way that is possible for you to extract the arrow; and do this with facility and tranquility, and slowness and firmness just as we have recommended to you.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And therefore contract the arrow so that the patient is according to the figure according to which you should have the position of the arrow in him, for it is more beneficial.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	But if that is not possible for you, then you should administer what is possible for you according to the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	But the arrows which are withdrawn by the contrary of the other part, or from where some part has already proceeded outward, or make looseness the extremity of the arrow by sensation of the part above the tendon and feel that eminently; then you should probe it; and the section should be according to the quantity in which the forceps take hold of it; and then extract it, for it is easier to obey.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	But if it is retained in the bone, then you should torture the lamella according to contrary so that the arrow presses upon the bone, and increase it by itself, and then extract it.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	And if not, leave it for a few days, and then repeat that until it is callused.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the shaft of the arrow is in him, then you should push it out by him.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	But if the shaft is broken and you want to administer impulsion, then you should introduce it into him, if it is sound, with a tool bent so that it enters the hollow of him in the head of the arrow and then push it out by him.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	But if the arrow is hollow, then you should push it out with a strong tool by entering into it, for the arrow is alleviated by that.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the arrow is poisoned, then you should hollow out all the flesh in which its root is, if it is possible for you to do that, and then heal that with whatever is appropriate.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the arrow pierces the foot or the belly or the bladder or the side, and is close enough that you can touch it with the probe, and it is possible for you to incise over it, then do so and be wary of vein or nerve, and extract it, and then close the wound if there is bleeding, and treat it until it is healed.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Here is a form of forceps by which arrows are extracted:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	Their tips are made like an owl's beak, serrated so that they can grasp the arrow and not let go.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And from these are made many species, large and small, according to the quantity of the size of the arrow and its depth, and the width of the wound, and the constriction of it.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	Form of hollow scoop from this concave end like an owl's feather so that the instrument of the arrow in it is eased, and the push of it:
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Form of push from blunt end:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	so that its instrument in the arrow is eased and pushed with that.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	Of phlebotomy of the veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so .xxx., de las quals so en le cap .xvi., so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins from which it is customary to phlebotomize are .xxx. [a number] of which there are .xvi. [a number] in the head, and two pulsating veins which are close to the ears, called alhasisain; two herbs which appear on both temples; and two veins in the two lacrimal glands of two holes that are called aspicientz; and the vein prepared in the middle of the forehead, and the vein that is at the end of the nose; and two veins in the neck; and two veins in the upper lip; and two veins in the lower lip; and — these are the veins that are called algelic —; and there are two veins below the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so .v.; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	But the veins that are phlebotomized in the arms are  .v. [a number]; Four of those veins in the arms are   .iv. [a number]; one is a cephalica, and it comes from the wild side; and the people call it  "the vein of the head", and it is blunt, and it is a small vein, and it is composed of a branch of the basilica, and another branch of the cephalica; and they call that   "vena de tot le cors" [vein of all the body], and basilica is a vein which is paused at the domestic side, and is named  “citillar”, and the people name it  "vena del ventre" [vein of the belly]; and the funis of the arm, and it is paused over the elbow, and it is that in which phlebotomy is performed, and it is that one which appears on the wrist from a manifest appearance; and salvatella, and it is the vein between the large auricular vein and the small one, and there are two branches in it.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And in the foot and calf there are three veins: one of those is which is below the curvature of the jaw of the wild side; and the second is sophena, and its location is below the calf of the domestic side; and sciatica vein, and its location is below the calf of the wild side; and there are other similar veins in the calf.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The opening of the veins which are close to the ears is for ancient catarrh and emigration and old ulcers in the head.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of bleeding them is according to what you see: it is that you wash the head of the patient, and rub the head of the patient in the occiput at the places where both veins are with a wide bandage so that there is good friction; then tighten the patient's neck with a bandage so that the two ears appear on both sides of the head in two spots which are depressed from the head; and feel those with your finger, and if you feel their pulses with your finger, here is a probe.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Then you take the cutting lance, and it is that which pierces, and then you insert it under the vein in the bone where the phlebotomy comes from the bone.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And then lift your hand with the vein and the bone to the parts above, and pierce the vein with piercing incision.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And let the length of the incision be the quantity of two fingers' widths or around that; and make the blood come out as much as you want.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then tighten it with powder and leave it so that it heals.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And see in the beginning of the book the incision of those and their cauterization.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	But the opening of phlebotomy of the two arterial veins in the temples is for ancient emigration and evil cold and constant ophthalmia and sharp overflows of the holes.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of bleeding them is according to what you see: tighten the patient' neck so much that the two veins appear by manifest appearance and the pulse of them appears below your finger; then probe.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	Then you lift the bone above the vein to the parts above with your finger, and insert the phlebotomy under, and lift the vein up; and pierce it as you have done in the other two veins; and let the blood run according to the quantity of your need.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then loosen the constriction of the patient, and place your finger over the vein for an hour, then place a bandage and powder over it and tighten it so that it heals.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And see in the beginning of the book the memory of them, and their incision, and attraction.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And therefore the opening of phlebotomy of the vein in the forehead is for ancient diseases of the face, and emigration, and heat, and putrid ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of phlebotomy of it is according to what you see: it is that the patient tightens his neck with a bandage so that the vein appears; and then take the instrument which is named   "fossory", of which this is its form:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Place the eminent point which is at the head of the fossory over that vein and pierce it with a needle or with another cause in its way, and let the blood run according to the quantity you want; then loosen the perforation of the patient and tighten it so that it heals.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	And sometimes it is opened with phlebotomy wide, but not believe that the phlebotomy is of acute end like the other phlebotomies, rather it is of flat end, and phlebotomy that according to the cross-section, for the bone is close by and they would break it in it if it were subtle.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	But the opening of the two veins in the lacrimal glands of two holes is for roughness of the holes, and heat and swelling in the holes, and diseases of the face.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	And the quality of phlebotomy is that the patient tightens his neck with a bandage, and then phlebotomize them, and you stand over his head.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And let the phlebotomy be made according to the cross-section, a little long with few phlebotomies, for in the place there is no flesh; and if the phlebotomy is subtle, then its end is broken.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Then let the blood run as much as it is necessary for you, and place bandages over them, and tighten them with a new one, then loosen them.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	But phlebotomy of the vein in the nose is for acute fever and violent cold, and diseases of the face and emigration, and especially when it is ancient.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient tightens his neck and then takes hold of his nose with your left hand, and take the phlebotomy needle subtilely long and place it in the middle part of the nose according to its rectitude, for the vein does not appear to the sense here, and because the blood begins to flow immediately.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	When you have finished with your hand with the phlebotomy little by little and make the blood flow according to your need; then ligature it for one night, for that is restored quickly.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	But the harm of the phlebotomy of the two sides leads to constriction of the throat and to the beginning of leprosy and many other illnesses and infectious and evil corrosive ulcers as well as herpes.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And the quality of the phlebotomy of those is that the patient tightens his neck by pulling down on it with a ligature; and the operator stands over the head of the patient, and the patient sits upon a stool.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	Then phlebotomize the vein along its length with a small phlebotomy needle little by little; and extract blood according to a moderate quantity or according to what you see is necessary, and then make an incision on the other vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And then loosen the ligature and tighten the two veins with a lighter string so that the patient is not suffocated, and lay him upon his back for the plague is healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	And the harm of the phlebotomy of the veins of the head, brings about small abscesses and pustules in the mouth and corruption of the gums and bad ulcers and fissures, and to bad ulcers which are in the nose and around it.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	And the quality of the phlebotomy of those is that you make the patient bend his head towards you, and tighten his neck with a bandage, and then open the lips of the patient and look at two veins of which one is on the right side of the lip and the second is on the left; and the demonstration of both is by the blackness of each of them, and that more so because in their circuit are small black veins; and then make an incision on each with a phlebotomy needle.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	But if you have doubt and do not know which is which, then make an incision on the one that has the most pus of those.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And make the same for the two veins that are in the upper lip.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	But usually it is better to incise the two veins which are in the lower lip.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	But from two veins which are below the tongue, the harm is phlebotomy of the cephalic to suffocations that are in the throat, to illnesses of the uvula, and to illnesses of the mouth.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And the quality of phlebotomizing those is that you follow the patient between your fingers in front of the sun, and elevate his tongue, and look under it, from one side of it is vein and from the other side is vein, and the color of each is declining towards blackness.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And then phlebotomize each one; and beware that you do not finish your hand in phlebotomizing those, for below those are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the veins which are phlebotomized in the vein of the head are those in which blood usually flows in all men, and the phlebotomy of them is done according to two manners, either by putting on the phlebotomy needle myrtilate or olive-wood to subtlety declining; or cauterizing with a scalpel, and calling it an antiseptic, and this is its form:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And that antiseptic is what is suitable for incision and of those are certain parts and subtle according to the amplitude of the veins and according to the tightness of them.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Form of myrtle phlebotomy:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	Be the side of it as it seems, and is suitable to open the concave veins full, proceeding apparently thick, and to those which contain thick blood توربات.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	And that is the form of olive-wood phlebotomy:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And this phlebotomy is of lesser breadth and more subtle extremity, and is suitable for phlebotomy of subtle veins which contain subtle blood citrine.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	But the harm of phlebotomy of the basilic vein which is one of three veins: for drawing blood from illnesses that are below the throat and neck, and of that which affects the feet and belly.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And it is suitable for the phlebotomizer, when he phlebotomizes that one, that he guards it well and be in great fear over it, for below it there is an artery, and if he err and punctures the phlebotomy needle wrong into the incision of the phlebotomy, that artery will be cut and bleeding flow, therefore it behooves him not to phlebotomize it with a pointed phlebotomy needle, but rather cauterize it with antiseptic.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the basilic does not appear by manifest appearance, then it behooves you to leave that one and change to the other, or to seek some vein of him; or phlebotomize in place of it at the end of the arm, for that one is manifest; and cauterize it with antiseptic as we have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	But if you want the phlebotomy of it metatarsus, then it behooves before the tightness of the arm that you touch the spot between which you know the location of the pulse, and then press on it with your hand; and then loosen the arm and cauterize the vein with a concave incision with antiseptic as we have said; and beware that you do not make the incision too close to the location of the artery.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	And when you see as you tighten the ligature, swelling in the spot that you have pressed with your hand, then that swelling is of the artery, and therefore loosen it.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if you see the blood flow in the phlebotomy thus with the color of an infant's skin, and the blood is subtle red, then know that it is of the arterial blood; and then press and pause your finger over that for a long time; and then lift your finger, and if the blood is abscised, for many veins are abscised, then tighten the arm and leave that one.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And keep watch over the patient for several days until he is healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	But if the blood is not abscised, and you see that there is no medicine present to it, then you make an incision on the artery, if it appears to you; for its extremity is contracted, and the blood is abscised; or take a small knife, and open it, and take the one hand and tighten that over the spot of the vein with a string and a powder within for several days.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And then if the blood is abscised, well and good; but if not, then heal that one with what it preceded from the memory of the spot of the powders flowing of blood.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And the abscision of the blood is difficult in many dispositions by the small place of the plague and the possibility of the tightness of the arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	But of the dark vein the phlebotomy is harm that draws blood from the superior part of the head and the inferior part of the body; because it is composed of a branch of the basilic and a branch of the cephalic as we have said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And beware of the phlebotomizer of that one that he be in great fear over the phlebotomy of it, for below it is a nerve; and then if he punctures the phlebotomy needle wrong into the incision and hurts the nerve, stupor will come upon him, and it is difficult to heal him, and if he is not healed at all, then that nerve many times appears to the sense; and if it is hidden in some men and is subtle and not shown, then it behooves you to pause the phlebotomy with which you phlebotomize with a concave incision with antiseptic, and avoid the nerve with your strength.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	If the vein is between two nerves, then cut it lengthwise.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The purpose of phlebotomy on the cephalic vein is to draw blood from the head and help with maladies of the brain.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And in this way, if you want to phlebotomize with a olive or myrrh phlebotomy; because it is the safest of all veins, as there are no arteries or nerves underneath.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	But however, you should be aware that when phlebotomizing with the olive or myrrh phlebotomy, you should only pierce the head of the ulna and seek the vein closer to the surface, without touching it, unless it is detected by percussion on the first attempt.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	But however, in many people a hematoma occurs when phlebotomized on the first attempt and does not disappear with that hematoma.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	But the quality of this phlebotomy and its accidents are many, in which you should consider their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first is that you know phlebotomy is not administered for the sake of health and for the hope of it and for the prevention of maladies; and that phlebotomy be done at the beginning of spring on an empty stomach in the morning and autumn, and in winter close to eating when signs of fullness appear.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And phlebotomy be done on the third day or the first after three hours have passed since sunrise.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	But phlebotomy that is administered; but when it provokes convenience and necessity for that, or at night or during the day, at any time and in all seasons.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And children should not be phlebotomized until they are 14 years old, and pregnant women should not be phlebotomized until the fourth month after seven months; and the elderly should not be phlebotomized after they have passed 60 years.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And when someone wants to be phlebotomized for any reason, they should cleanse their bowels before the phlebotomy with a lion's clyster, if in those there is retained fecal matter, so that the veins do not throw off excesses during the phlebotomy of the bowels, which are purified, and that they do not harm the principal members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And those who are phlebotomized should not be nauseous and vomiting, or suffering from a disease or drunkenness, or have just recovered from a fever or diarrhea, nor the sick with hydrops, but phlebotomy should be avoided during colic pain and vomiting, and shortly after abdominal pain, and during multiplication of cough and of work and of fasting or vigils and due to anything that weakens the virtue, or due to a body or animal.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And consider carefully in subtlety of humors before that if the blood is thick, with foods and drinks, and with medicines if that is possible for him.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And enter a bath if any cause does not prohibit it, or be exercised by some exercise so that the blood is subtilized.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And pause the phlebotomy of him in the afternoon of the day, which is around the hour of terce, as we have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And for sure that the foot of him is guarded in that day from all animal accidents, such as anxiety, anger, fear, and from all bodily accidents, such as labor and excessive grief and cough and their likes.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And in his own room let the causes be present in the use of which men usually suffer from aromaticity and odorification and from balms and their likes according to the amount of possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And follow the phlebotomist on a cushion that is higher than the cushion of him who is to be phlebotomized.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And then extend his arm, and wipe that with his hand the phlebotomist twice or thrice; and then tighten the bandage with a belt and wrap him two times.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And let the bandage be loose, because a loose bandage or a bandage with excess, causes the flow of blood; or is with softening, and then prohibited the body of the blood from going out.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And let the bandage, so that he who is to be phlebotomized rubs his hands together between them so that the veins are swollen and are declared by sensation.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And let the phlebotomist apply his phlebotomy with a little antique oil properly; and then pause his right hand over that vein, from which he wants to phlebotomize, so that the vein goes out a little, and the percussion is set because of those veins that are tightly bound like a string, they flee when phlebotomy is applied, and from those is that is full of windiness, and when phlebotomy is paused over that, it is contracted.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And thus, for that let the phlebotomist be quiet and be solicited in all these causes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And let the phlebotomy be paused, but if the vein is opened in one go, then good; and if not, you iterate that another time below that location a little, or over it with compression, if the location is not hematomatic.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the location is hematomatic or the sick person is frightened, then let it be left for one or two days, and do not tighten the bandage, because it will likely draw out the hematoma, nor enter a bath.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And let the phlebotomy be iterated if there is love.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the perception is small and the blood flows gently, and you fear that there does not flow out as much blood as you want, then let the phlebotomy be iterated in that vein according to rectitude and adjusted in the perception a little; and do that with compression before that location is hematomatic, because that location is hematomatic in many men due to small perception.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	But if that is already hematomatic, then do not iterate on it, because it will not help you in any way; and pause over that some part of the opening of oil, because it quickens the blood flow.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And it is better in this location with oil than the other oils.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	And similarly, apply opening of oil in all phlebotomy when phlebotomizing the veins due to the prohibition of the flow of blood, and do that with tyriaca alfolia and sagzenea when it is paused over one of those on the location, because the blood is subtilized and is agitated when it is thick.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if in the location of phlebotomy a large hematoma is engendered, because many times it happens and most often to him who is not stat bleeding but that go-round, or in the perception of the vein is small, then you bind it, and pause over the location sponge infused with water and salt, slightly warmed, because it is dissolved.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And let him do that appropriately by the flow of blood from that vein or from another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if it turns black or green in the location for several days, do not fear that; and if you want, pause over that some cause of aloe and of myrrh dissolved, or some cause of juice of mallow or of camomille or their likes.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	And many times hematomas and eminences happen due to phlebotomy of the basilic vein.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And then pause your hand over that, and if you then tighten softness over that, then that eminence is bad and harmful; therefore be careful that you pause over that some cause of what we have said, because the blood of the artery will flow out surely.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And make a plaster with that which stiffens, so that the place is hardened, and cure it with the other cure until it is healed.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And draw blood from all people according to the quantity of their virtue and according to the color that appears above the blood according to what is apparent.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	Because if the blood is black, then let it be dried until it turns red; and similarly, if you see it as thick, then let it be dried until it becomes thin; and similarly, if it is sharp, let its acuteness be stopped.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And to him who is full and strong and needs bloodletting at one time, the phlebotomy of the vein should be enlarged, and the phlebotomies should be wide.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And for him who is feeble, let the contrary be done to him, and he who draws blood from him in many times, let his incision be narrow.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	And the best that is administered for phlebotomy of a vein is that it be a transverse section, not a puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	And this method of phlebotomy is safe from the flow of blood and the cutting of nerves, and it is most praiseworthy and safest than phlebotomy according to width and length.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And whoever is accustomed to having a fainting after phlebotomy, and you must cure him before the phlebotomy with a little bread soaked in wine of mulberries or simple oxymel warmed; and draw from him blood three or four times.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if it is a fainting of complexive nature, then take before the phlebotomy bread soaked in syrup of myrrh or in scented syrup with spices like pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and similar, or in scented syrup and very fragrant.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if a fainting occurs after phlebotomy and the cause of it is too much blood being drawn, then let him take to drink water with meat and scented syrup very subtle; and use of aromatics with aloes, and let him bind his feet with that.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use the other causes that we have said in the division in the chapter on fainting through evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And whoever wants to open his veins and dissolve his blood on the second day, let it be from whom phlebotomy is for great evacuation, and whose nature is cold, let him draw blood little by little according to the quantity of their virtue in continuous days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	But whoever wants to open his veins and let his blood flow on the second day, and his body is strong, then do so about seven or nine hours from the first phlebotomy.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	But whoever wants to draw blood from his body contrary to the part to which he inclines, let him be drawn on the second or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	But a body in which much warm blood has already been drawn and is acute and causes fever, let him draw from it blood in one time and let a great quantity be drawn from it and the incision be enlarged so that fainting occurs, because you will have kept all the conditions of phlebotomy; and place your hand over his pulse toward the heart of the blood, so that death does not occur in place of fainting, for many times this happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And do not when you want to open the veins and evacuate blood on the second day, when the orifice of the vein is already closed and it has become difficult for the blood to issue, let you press upon it with violence and it having been extended slightly bent, for this is too much ill.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Have it remain until it is phlebotomized again; or remove it with the acuteness of phlebotomy that coagulates blood in the orifice of the vein; or apply to it a poultice of tallow, or of sandarac, and compress it gently until the blood has been drawn out.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein is inflamed, then leave that and do not touch it until the inflammation is settled.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if necessity compels you to draw blood again, and there is no excuse, then you will draw it over that spot or on the other arm in another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the vein called “the strings of the arm” is phlebotomized in place of the basilic or cephalic when they are not found or are hidden, for it is composed of those.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	And the quality of his phlebotomy is that the patient immerses his hand in warm water until the vein swells and the vein appears obviously.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	And then it is bound over that with a ligature with mild tightness; and phlebotomy is made according to the small transverse, not according to width or length.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And it is made ample and your phlebotomy of it over the joint of the hand a little.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if the flow of blood is prohibited, then you immerse the hand in warm water and draw out the blood in the water until you perceive your need.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	But if you are in the days of summer, then you will be excused from immersing the hand in warm water, and the body is bathed in warm water in winter time.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And phlebotomy of this vein is safest than of all the other veins, for there does not pulse in it any pulsating vein, nor nerve.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And phlebotomy of the crook of the right hand is related to diseases of the liver.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of his phlebotomy is that you bind the hand with a ligature or with your hand, for you have immersed it in warm water, until the vein is swollen and it has been demonstrated evidently; and phlebotomize it transversely; and if you incision it everywhere, it will not harm anything.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And beware that you do not finish your hand with phlebotomy, for beneath there are the nerves of the teeth bared of flesh.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And then immerse the hand in warm water and draw out the blood in that, for if you do not immerse it in warm water, the blood will coagulate in the orifice of the vein, and it is prohibited to flow.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And when blood is drawn according to the quantity of necessity, then you place over the vein olive oil and salt, so that it is not consolidated firmly; and similarly, let you do in every limb a narrow cut.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	But the youthfulness of phlebotomy of that of the left hand is that it is related to diseases of the soul.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And do similarly in phlebotomy of him also as you have done in the other.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And the youthfulness of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is to diseases that are below in the body, also as diseases of the mother, and to retention of menstruation, and to diseases of the knees and ulcers of buttocks and of legs, and to their likenesses of the diseases.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	And the quality of his phlebotomy is that the patient immerses his foot in warm water and makes friction over it until veins appear evidently; and he applies to the joint of the foot with a bandage; and the place of the vein the toe points, and from that are ramified in the fascia of the foot very thin branches.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And then phlebotomize the more ample ram or below the leg from which the toe points, for it is better and more safe.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if phlebotomize that in the fascia of the foot, then you beware of nerves which are below that on the fascia of the foot, and place your phlebotomy as you phlebotomize it transversely, as if you want to incision it.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And let the phlebotomy begin.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	But if the bleeding of blood is prohibited, then you should repeat the foot in the cold water and let the blood run in that space which has been evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the phlebotomist makes a mistake in the first vein, then repeat the phlebotomy on another vein, for the location is salty; and do not fear evil, but rather guard against the nerves as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And likewise do with the opposite leg.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And from the sciatic nerve, the location as we have said is due to the talus below the ankle of the wild party.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And the youth of the phlebotomy of it is at the pain of the hip when it is due to blood cautery.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the quality of the phlebotomy of it is that the patient enters into a bath, and hastens and stretches his hip from the side of the broad space above the talon above four fingers in one long bandage, for it does not appear except through it.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And therefore when it appears, then you phlebotomize that according to each device that is possible to you and according to the cross, and it is better; or insert that by incision or cut that by section, for the location of it is salty.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And it is in most men hidden and veiled; and if you obscure that, and it does not appear to the sense of all, then phlebotomize some vein of it, and it is that which appears on the back of the foot opposite the little finger and the ring finger.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And guard against the nerves, and let the blood run in the quantity that you want.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	Then loosen the tourniquet and place it over the location of the phlebotomy tightly and strengthen the area, for it heals quickly.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Of ventilation and of the qualities of using those.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Ventozes are of horns, or of copper, or of glass.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	And ventilation is done according to two manners: one of them is with scarification and extraction of blood, and the other is ventilation without scarification.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this ventilation which is without scarification is according to two manners, for it is either with fire or without fire.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And to the ventozes which are administered with scarification and extraction of blood are fourteen locations of the body, of which one in which ventozes are paused is alnocrati, and it is the posterior part of the head; and the middle location of it is from two parts of the neck together; and ventozes of the chin below the mandible further down from the mouth; and ventozes of two spatulas; and ventozes of alohoster, and it is above the end of the beard; and ventozes of two little horns, and they are of two arms; and ventozes of two ankles; and ventozes of two thighs.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	And ventilation does not extract blood except from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and by this it does not have the virtue through them, just as it is through phlebotomy; nor do we believe that ventilation should be done with fire or without fire in any disease made by fullness within which the whole body is evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	But if necessity prompts for ventilation for disease or for continued, we administer that throughout the hour at the beginning of the month and in its end, and in the middle of it and whenever it is necessary.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The cause of which is that in men there is blood multiplied within because of indigestion by extraction from it by ventilation and atrobates in their head severity and swelling; and of those is that atrobate fullness and heat in their face and in their head, and in their neck; and of those who have an abundance of blood in the face and front and darkness and feebleness in their eyes; and of those whose nose is enlarged; and of those whose ears are red; and of those who dream much.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And therefore when it comes to one of these causes, and especially if it is in the third or middle of the month, then we command ventilation be done after two or three hours have passed of the day.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And likewise of ventilation from the nape is that when it conferes to gravity in the head and to that which is bent down into the eyes; but if that is, then let there be proper evacuation of all the body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this ventilation is in the location of phlebotomy of the cephalic.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it is not lawful to use that which is of complex friction, or in which there is catarrh, for it gives great harm to that.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And therefore let the use of that not be by the old, and on heads in which there are cold diseases.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	But if on that there is continued oblivion, then let you command the ventozator to place his hand a little bit with the ventose to the parts below, fearing the generation of oblivion.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	But ventilation of alkehel is in the location of phlebotomy of the vein fusca and of the basilic: and by this there is asthma, and constriction of throat and to the split of instrument of throat, and cough, and fullness.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And let the ventose of alkehel be bound a little, for if it is paused below, it generates weakness in the body and in the stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And ventilation of alhagdahan confers to accidental pains in the head and to ophthalmia, and emigrarea, and pre-focic, and to pains in the roots of teeth; and it is in the location of phlebotomy of the basilic.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And let you command the ventozator that he not press his hand with scarification lest he insert the artery and accite blood flow.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And ventilation below the chin confers to alcola in the mouth, and to corruption of the gum, and to appearances like those of diseases which are in the mouth, and they stand in the location of phlebotomy of aliheric which is in the two lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	But the ventilation that is done on the two spatulas confers to caphatan, which is done by fullness of heat.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And the ventilation of the two openings within the fingers confers to the benefit of phlebotomy of three veins, namely of the basilic, fusca and cephalic, for it draws blood from all those veins more delicate than those other veins thicker within which the attraction comes to the three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And command the ventozator that he not too much process with scarification, for the location is stripped of flesh, and below it are nerves and arteries.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And it is one ventilation with which is ventilated over alshosses and confers to the effluences of the anus and to ulcers below.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And let you command the ventozator that it is great ventilation, and that it is of copper, for the location indigests from strong section; and strongly it has been struck with small ventoses and scarified with scarification.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	But ventoses of the legs minor by minor demonstration, for they draw blood from all the body, and confer to old pains of the knees and of the mother, and of the bladder; and they provoke menstruation, and confer to bothor and ademil; and they stand in the location of phlebotomy of two sophenas, and alahorcoben, and of two ankles.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	However, they weaken all the body and make syncope occur in some men.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And from the armpits the jugular vein is very close to the jugular vein at the armpits of both arms.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	And the quality of the position of the veins is that you place the vein at the beginning seen and sucked by a moderate suction, and do not prolong the position of the veins, but place them lightly, and keep those tightly, and so that the humors come to the place equally.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not cease to iterate this and continue until you see the place already reddened and swollen and that the blood appears red.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And then you scrape and repeat the suction little by little, and then consider the disposition of the body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	Because that man who has thin skin in few places, beware that you scrape him once and not more, so that the place is not ulcers.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And command the scarifier to enlarge the scarification and take a little, and moderate the suction with ease.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if in the blood is thickness, then beware that you scrape twice, because in the first scraping the path of subsidence to the blood and its moisture is opened.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	But in the second, to the examination acquired from the extraction of thick blood.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the blood is very foul, then let there be made a third scraping so that the last one is accomplished.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	And finally, when we want to extract blood a little or a little, it is enough for us with one scraping.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we want extraction of a lot of blood, we scrape with a deep scraping; and if we know that the blood is thick, then beware that we scrape with a wide scraping.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the term of the scraping in which the depth of the vein is just enough.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if the one of whom the vein is thick, tough, dark and its pores are tight, then let the places of the veins be anointed gently, widely and resolutely; if it is in summer time, then with oil of aloe or oil of violets, or oil of crushed almonds, or oil of cedar wood; and if it is in winter time, then with oil of nutgrass, or oil of lily, or oil of camomile, or blood, and to those similar.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the superfluity is thick and rough, then let the oil be of amarant, or oil of balsamita, or oil of aloe, or oil of anise, and to those similar.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	But if the scarifier is of ample pores of thin skin, then beware that he be prohibited from oil, and beware that at those places of veins that his close to the vein are washed with lye or hot water of saltpeter, or water of cedar wood, or water of borage, and similar to those.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And that man whose blood is of great humidity, wash his veins with sour wine, or water of myrtle and sumach and similar to those.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And of that man whose superfluities are thick, wash his veins with old wine, or water of sanseric, which is marjoram, or of infusion of anise, or of camomile, and to those similar.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And beware that the vein be kept away from bathing; have so that it is administered close to the bath for an hour or two, and beware that he sleep close to the vein.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What should one do who must be bled before the bleeding?
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	Consider so at the beginning: then if the scarifier or he who is to be bled is bilious and there is upon him sharp blood and inflammation, then beware that he take causes of chilling, so with milky acetic milkweeds, and endive in sour wine and leeks, and sesamum, and julep, and to those similar.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And give him food so with poults, and meats of fat fowls, and foods seasoned with acids, and to him similar.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And of that man whose complexion is rough, beware that he take in drinking essarop of honey, or essarop of sesame seeds, and sumach, and very odorous wine mild between summer and winter; and that it be commended to him to use little drinking and eating, and give his food poults and cannabinum and pigeons and small fowls and doves.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And beware that on the day of bleeding and phlebotomy his drink is more than his food.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And beware that he be given in drinking in some hours to certain men thiuriaca of alfarac, or medicines of musk, as it is muscaded, or alcelita before the bleeding or phlebotomy or close to it, so that the principal members are comforted and that the blood is subsided; and beware that they take that cold.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	But the veins that are above the liver, and on the milk, and on the penis, and on the navel, in the places of the joints, and the tip of the shoulder, for these members do not suffer scraping upon themselves.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And it is not wanted by those but attraction of blood from the member, so with pause the vein over the breast in a malady of flow of blood of the blood of the veins; and use that to be dissolved thick roughness of the member, so with pause on the belly and the navel; for that rarefies the member and scrapes it and eases the pain when it resolves the thickness.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And already it is paused over the bones when they are fallen in their setting or broken, for by virtue of strong attraction their bone setting and eradicates the break from its place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And likewise it does when it is paused over the liver and the milk you must have thickness in those in enclosure.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	And these veins are administered seen with suction only; and some times are administered with fire.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And some times are administered full of tepid water in the maladies of the milk.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And this is for what the vein must be filled and have pus a lot, then it is water only or water in which are cut herbs to that convenient.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Form of vein administered with fire: it is the width of the orifice of two grains, according to what we have formed; and the quantity of the fire be the measure of a palm; and it is in its breadth, in the place that is in the circuit, the measure of it, the hole is small according to the quantity that enters into it an agul.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	It is made of wood of elm or citron tree, of thick edges, lion, inwal and terses so that it does not lead the member must its position upon it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And it is at the base of it crossbar of wood or of iron, on which is paused candle with the fire.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And already it is this vein great more of that which we have recommended; and the little less of that according to the maladies and the state of him who uses that.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the veins of children and exhausted others than the veins of youths and of large bodied.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the quality of pausing that vein with fire on the member is that it extends the hand with decent fire of wood in front a little candle of wax, and pause that on the base of the crossbar at the middle place of the vein, so that the fire be kindled all around below so that it is not burned the malady.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And then it is paused on the member of the malady, and the finger is on the hole that we have said, while we hold the veins and do not feel the finger and that the vapor rises over that hole, then the vein becomes so dissolved.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And light the candle according to its usual manner, and repeat that if you are in need of that.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	However, the cupping glass that is administered for pleurisy, with water, in which there is no transverse vein or pulse, and it is not administered unless it is filled with water, and it is placed on the body only briefly.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is how it works: The larger the cupping glass is, the better, so that it can receive a great quantity of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Chapter 97
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Leech suckers are not administered on small body parts unless cupping glasses cannot be used because of their size, such as the lips, gums and similar areas; or on naked flesh, such as the fingers, nose and similar areas.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And you must use leeches that have been found in the smooth, clean waters of streams.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	Then, they should be kept in the water for a day and night to become hungry, and nothing should interrupt their appetite inside; and the patient's body should be cleared first by phlebotomy and cupping; and then the patient's limbs should be rubbed until they turn red; and then they should be placed on the patient.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are full, then:
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if it is possible to draw blood from the spot with a cupping glass, it is better for healing.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	And if not, then wash the spot with sweet wine and then with water; and it should be rubbed and expressed.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the flow of blood is prolonged due to the leeches, and it drips, then you should dip a cloth in cool water and place it over the drip to absorb the dripping blood.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the blood is flowing profusely, then powder vitriol, or gall nuts and similar astringent substances over the wound to stop the flow of blood; or place cooked broad bean pods on the wound and let them adhere to it until the blood flow stops.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And if necessary, repeat the application of leeches as often as possible.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if the leeches are prohibited from being suspended, then rub the wound with fresh blood or pierce the spot where the blood flows with a needle and let it flow out; and then they should be placed over the spot so that they can suck the blood as soon as it flows.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want them to stop, then powder them with some ground aloe, or salt, or ash, and they will immediately.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Thus begins the treatment of the third part: restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is very important in the art of medicine; it is the restoration of fractures and accidental displacement in the bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh son, know that the foolish doctors and the common people and those who have not read the books of the Ancients nor understood a letter from them make boasts about this chapter.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason, the way of the wise in our land is hidden; and I have not been obliged to do that at any time; and I have not used what I learned, except through long study of the books of the Ancients and understanding their wisdom, so that I could extract their science.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And I have added to that through experience and study over the length of my life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have already described in this chapter everything that my science and experience tell me about it; since I have condensed it for you, freeing you from the obligation of reading; and I have condensed it at the end of the discussion; and I have demonstrated it at the end of the demonstration; and I have formed it into many forms of instruments which are administered in this way, as I have done in two preceding chapters.
Capitol primier.	Chapter First.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Summary and collection of the conditions for which a fracture of bones is necessary, from which before we begin to discuss the restoration of broken and various members of the body.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Now, therefore, let us begin the introduction to this chapter with summaries of our speech; and the chapters which are understood by artisans at first sight and at a standstill over their truth, as you and those who are prompt to know or learn this noble art from you.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And therefore I say that when it happens to someone a fracture or displacement or twisting or hernia, then you should first treat them with phlebotomy or the application of that, or whatever poultice, if no contrary cause prohibits it, such as debility of strength, or is that person an infant, or old and feeble, or in the time of vehement heat, or of vehement rubbing.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And then let them eat food made of fresh herbs and of birds' meat and crab apples; and refrain from thick meats and filling foods that fill the veins with blood, so that they do not fear the appearance of pus in the body.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And then return the patient to their usual diet.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And therefore when the broken bone begins to be restored, then let the patient eat nourishing foods of food rich in nutrients, thick and heavy, such as foods made from wheat cooked with water, and rice, and peas, and beans, and the bellies of cows, and hogs, and fresh pigs, and gross wine, and similar to those, and on this diet coagulation of the fracture occurs more gently and better.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And know that the bones break more when they are in people who are in their prime and feeble, it is not possible for them to be continued and consolidated according to their nature due to the drying out of their members.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they are consolidated and continued according to their nature all the time by the drying out of those members; and they continue and are consolidated by the length of that time, even as the bones of small children.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	But nature adjusts and connects the broken bone of all parts for no apparent cause like glue in which there is thickness that sticks and joins together so that it is strong at the end, as fire at first, so that no contrary cause prohibits it from its work.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason, it is necessary that the patient eat foods which are heavy and sticky and thick, as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	Many kinds of fractures according to the kind of member.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And know that the kinds of fractures are diverse according to the kinds of members, for a fracture of the bone of the leg is different from a fracture of the bone of the head; and a fracture of the bone of the foot is different from a fracture of the bone of the toe; and similarly all the other members are diverse among themselves.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And I have experienced all kinds of fractures, explained in my own chapter distinct from others.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	Many kinds of fractures within themselves.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And the kinds of fractures of bones in their joints are diverse; for there is made an arched fracture when it occurs in them in stars; and some times the fracture is according to the length of the bone: and so the fractures are of the sitis, and knuckles, and accessories, as well as those which occur in the hand, and a crack, and disruption in the head, and a fissure fracture.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And there is great pain or torment inherent in the restoration of each according to what comes to mind about it, distinct from the others in their locations.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	A sign of bone fracture.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And by this is known a fracture of the bone: its crookedness, and appearance of it to the senses, and feeling of it when you apply your hand to it.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And therefore if there is not a crookedness visible in the place, nor any feeling of it when you touch it with movement and the patient does not find great pain, then there is not here a fracture.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	It is possible that there be crookedness or a small crack, then you should not groan when you touch it with your hand and with compression of all; but pause upon it medicines of which you have remembrance properly at the moment which suits the location; and let it be bound closely with a subtle bandage.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And know that the location when it is arched and not split into two or else anything that does not happen in it satagium, as all the parts of its comparison are removed, then it behooves you to commence from your hour to the rectification of it have that to it happens apostema caut.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if to it happens apostema cautery, then let it be that for some days until the apostema ceases; and let it heal that second in whatever manner you can of elevation and ingen.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And know that restoration of it and piercing of it is less difficult than of the bone in which happens satagium.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And let it be bound closely according to what will come the reminder of it.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	But if in the bone it is satagium, then extension of this broken member from two parts is necessary, if it is the hand or the foot; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two cords or one cord and the hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And let your position be such that you pause the member in its natural location according to which the parts are extended of the broken member, then you must pierce these accessories with ingen and according to whatever manner you can in their locations.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And guard you according to your strength that no pain or harm happens over the patient by your operation of pain or lesion; and assure you according to your ability that you apply one bone to the other in companionship according to their best forms.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And it behooves you in that hour profitably to touch with your hand that, and if you see here any diverse cause, rectify that and heal that by the quantity of your skill.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And avoid violent extension and compression, as also with foolish doctors who many times make happen apostema cautery by their operation, or make happen contraction in the member as we have seen this by their many operations.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And let it be connected, let there be equability and decent operation and stricture of that member, and rest and tranquillity; warn the patient about this and make him move so that he does not groan in the hour of his vigils and sleep, and see his revolution and agitation, and attend to his digestion, and attend to all his movements with all your skill; and regard that the position of the member is a position by which there is assured pain, for the cause is when he feels in the disposition of the position of the member, pain or lesion; then it behooves you to change that to another disposition of that by which he does not feel pain; and guard with this that the position of it be direct and healed, so that the member does not happen crookedness when it is restored.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of the stricture of the broken member is that which you count; for you know that the broken members are differentiated in their smallness and in their greatness and in the shape of them.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And those that are small as the arm and the finger and the wrist and similar to them, then let the bandage be of very subtle cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	But those that are thick as the thigh or the calf, let there be a hard bandage in them, for the tight bandage connects the large member and tightly that from all parts with even stricture, so that in it does not enter rottenness.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And let it be commence, let your evacuation of equability pause convenient medicine at that, over the location of that fracture with three bandages or four according to which the member deserves; and tighten your hand a little with the binding.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And let you come to that at the beginning most sovereign of the location of the fracture, and tighten so that your tightness with which you have tightened the location of the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	And let you lengthen yourself by bandage of the location of the fracture a little, and soften the stricture a little at a time, while you take from the location its large part.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	And let you take another bandage and wind that other part over the broken location with bandage, and let your operation be in the stricture of the bandage and in softening of that according to what we have said in the first bandage above.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And let you pause between the bandages of wadding or cloth with which there is healed the crookedness of the fracture, if in it there is crookedness; but if not, then do not pause in it any cause.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And let you pause over it another bandage, and let it be healed over these bandages decently made as soon as in the location there is not inflammation or apostema cautery, and then pause over it that which stops the apostema that and that ostes the inflammation; and let it be that for some days; then you tighten over it the bandages.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And let the bandages be of the thickness of wadded cane rod, and be formed wisely; or they be of wood of pine; or of strips of palm; and let the breadth of each bandage be according to this form and this figure:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However let the bandage that is paused over that fracture be thicker and a little tighter than the other bandages, and the length of the bandage according to how it is lengthened from the fracture is lesser, is lesser the stricture; and let you tighten over the bandages with another bandage according to your first stricture; and let you ligate above it with decent fiel according to what we have said about stricture, and let the stricture be according to the location of the fracture more, and as much as it is lengthened from the fracture, is lesser the stricture.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And let the threads be medium in thickness and subtlety, and they be of light lye; and if the threads are thick, as we have seen by the operation of some foolish people their threads of cords of the rope, and it is great error when the stricture is not equality.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And very thin threads are not convenient, for you will not accomplish by stricture with those what you want, and there must not be space of a finger between bandage and bandage.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient is hurt by the ends of the bandages, then pause under those of wadding or wool so that it does not make lesion to him.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Some fractures are with plaster, and happen disruption in the tendon, and I have come to reminder in that in the head according to singleness.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And know that not every broken member is bound with bandages on the first day; the cause is because the member, when it is large, let you not pause over it bandages unless after some days or seven or more, according to your security of happening of apostema cautery.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	And this is the manner of the splints with which the Ancients used to heal, they which are paused over fracture and dislocation and crookedness.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Manner of splint as to bath of restoration of fracture convenient to many complexities and chiefly to women and children, for it is that which one takes from the powder of bran, and it is the pith of the flour that comes from movement of the mill in the walls of the mill.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And cover him thus as he is, except that you cover him with a white cloth, and put the composition not thickly nor thinly over him; and then use it.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another method of preparing a restorative plaster for fractures and dislocations and torques: take assafetida, opoponax, acacia, enula, and myrrh, which is the resin of wild mastic trees, all in equal drams; myrrh and aloes, each five drams; aloe juice or egg white if the patient's complexion is scorched; and use this plaster, for it is well-composed and quickly restores broken bones, and many men have benefited from it.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another method of preparing a plaster that benefits fractures and torques: take mastic and white hellebore, each ten drams; myrrh and aloe, each five drams; acacia six drams; Armenian bole twenty drams.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	Let all be sifted in a mortar with powdered incense, and let them be mixed, and let them be applied with vinegar or white wine, and let it be used.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Method of plaster for joints and bones separated from their places, and pain caused in them, and also to wounds and fractures: let wool be soaked in wine vinegar and olive oil, and let it be laid over the affected area.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	It is not a virtue of restoration, but rather of cauterization and also to expel pain properly.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another method of plaster that restores broken bones: take the leaves of the fig tree and leaves of wild poppy; pound both together and make a plaster from them.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida .i.; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Method of plaster for breaking open and administering the restoration of broken bones, and also to resolve the residue of wounds: take powdered aloes, camomile and violet flowers, and flour of linseed, of all these an equal portion .i.; Let all be sifted and let them be mixed with wine, if the member is not wounded.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	But if it is wounded, then cover it with water of celandine or vinegar, and use it.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another method of a stronger plaster for resolution, when apostema happens due to the restoration of a member: take powdered aloes and licorice root, and poppy seeds, and balm, and marjoram, violet flowers, camomile, all these in equal parts i; let all be sifted and mixed with water of sage or warm water or wine, according to the quality of the member and the condition of its color.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	But hypocras does not dry in the air, so it must be laid over the broken member to restore it; nor can it be made of wax and oil alone without another cause; and it should be applied between thickness and thinness.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	But it is known that they are laid over the broken member to restore it, and its causes as well as if there is dryness with heat in it; for this reason also myrrh, incense and similar things are added according to those causes which we have mentioned.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	Method of plaster that helps with injury and pain: take miel, and cedar wood shavings or pine tree bark, and aloes, and salt, all in equal parts; let them be sifted and mixed, and let a plaster be made from it.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	But the amount according to the extent that the binding covers, and let it be bound tightly, consider if there is not pain nor bruise nor broken bone, and it does not hurt in its place; then do not loosen it for several days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if there happens to the affected area vehement pain or bruise or swelling, then cut or loosen it immediately, and remove the plaster from it.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	And take a piece of linen and marine sponge that is moistened, and let the affected area be washed with mild water; and with this wash the affected area until the pain ceases and the swelling is reduced; then let it rest for one hour; and let wool soaked in vinegar and oil or roasted oil be laid over it for one night, and be sure of cauterization, and let the swelling of the member be reduced, and the pain of it be eased.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then tighten it gently and apply a small plaster lightly, and not tightly with your first tightening, and make it subtle by that until it is healed.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if the apostema and heat and pain and swelling and all the accidents are already reduced to nothing, and you have removed plaster and tightening, then do this in the same way as before.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o .vii.; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if there does not happen to the member any cause of those which we have mentioned, then do not loosen it except after three or four or five or seven days; and some times it is left for 20 days according to how you see from the loosening of the member, thus as we have said, until the fracture adheres and comes close to the coagulation of the flesh over it.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And then tighten it gently but not as in your first tightening, and loosen it according to the increase of the swelling of the patient's body, according to how it is preceded by its recovery.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	But if you see the site of the fracture already dried and weakened but not covered, then know that nourishment is prohibited from coming to it; and therefore moisten it with mild water due to total loosening that of the patient, and let this be for three days; and loosen the binding a little, and by this operation the member will recover more quickly.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	But that which the fols of the restorers of the broken member do another loosening when it is not restored at the beginning, according to how it covers, and is restored according to crookedness, is error according to their operation, and great fear, and if they were drawn out by force in their free sites and were hit against it.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And I have not seen any of them doing that, so that it is most reasonable that it does not happen.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Chapter according to: Of fracture when it happens in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The species of fractures are many, and the forms of them are diverse, and the causes are distinct, for any fracture is not made by the blow of a staff, and the blow hits all the bones inside the skull, which is under the skull, thus as it strikes in the trunk, and by this that type of fracture is called ascial; or the staff enters a part of the bone, and enters the flesh of it and does not pass the incision into the interior of it; and this type of fracture is called absolute elevation.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the wound of these two fractures is large or small, and from the fracture which is crushed or broken; and its cause is impact with a stone or fall on a stone, and those similar to it.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture is penetrating, approaching the membrane below the bone, or it is on the surface of the bone, and the wound of these two fractures is large or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And the fracture that is concealed in the bone, in the thickness of the hair, and because of this such a type of fracture is named capillary.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And fracture that is caused by impact or fall on a stone, or something similar, that forces a thin layer of bone to enter the interior, and this occurs in the concave location just as it does to the teeth when they suffer an impact and a part of their interior is broken off.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	And most often this occurs in the bodies of elderly people, just as it does to children's heads.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And all these species of fractures are set apart like stars separated.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And you must use a bandage for all this in its place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And we know all these species of fractures by detection over them and by investigation with our fingers and observation of the corrupted flesh that is over them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And capillary fracture is known by its being uncovered on the bone and washed clean with a sponge, for the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	But in the cure of fractures consider first the accidents of the patient, and then if you see from these accidents that something signifies by manifest indication regarding fear, such as vomiting of cholera, and extension, and loss of understanding, and loss of voice, and fainting, and acute fever, and discharge from orifices and redness of these, and similar to them in the major dispositions, one who is not healed.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if you see accidents that do not run their course, then you expect health, then you begin the cure of him.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	The reason for this is that if the wound has come to you in the beginning as it was wounded and this is in the days of winter, then consider that you study in the appearance of the bone before the day fourteen according to all disposition.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is in the days of summer, then consider that you cook the bone before the seventh day, having that which is below the membrane be corrupted from the bone, and that accidents that we have counted occur.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already arrived at the membrane covering the brain and it is in small pieces and crushed, then consider that you insert the crushed and ground-up part according to how I will tell you.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And it is that you wash the head of the wounded and uncover over the bone according to custom and manner possible to you according to the figure of the wound, and let it be lighter on the patient.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if it happens to you that you must do the detection of the bone, flows of blood or pus cauterized, then you must oppose it with what is proper, and it is that you apply the location with cloths infused in wine and rose oil, and let the wound rest while the apostema is sedated, and be certain of the flows of blood; and then begin on the circuit of the bone and in its ablation.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And this must be according to one of two manners of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the one manner is that you insert the bone with a narrow incision knife, and this is its form: And then administer another incision knife this one a little wider than that one; and this is its form:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And the other manner is that you excavate the bone with a wide scoop, and approach it by the sides according to manner possible to you. Then administer the incision knife wider than the first one.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And you must cover the bone according to manner possible to you, and cover with flesh that is over it and cover with a wide scoop, and cover by the sides. And if the fracture is crushed or broken, then you must cover the bone with a narrow incision knife, and cover with flesh that is over it, and cover by the sides.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use them with facility in impact on the incision knife so that it does not concuss the head and lead that one.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is strong and hard, then consider that you pierce in the circuit of it before you administer the incision knives with the drills which are named non-deepening drills.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And they are not named thus but because these do not pause the end of the bone until it is directly below it, for the drill has rounded extremity or edge over that which is below the head of it like an edge or small circle, and this prohibits from being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	And it is convenient that you take from these drills great number of which each one convenes the thickness of every bone, while being present in all skulls of the brain the extremity of which is acute, and the quantity in length and brevity is according to the quantity of thickness of this skull.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	And if because of what is below the bone flows of blood or pus cauterized, then you must oppose it with what is proper and approach the head of the patient to it with a wide scoop according to manner possible to you.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And then insert with incision knives that which is between each traction of the bone, and do that most subtle thing that you can over that at end of elevation, as we have said, while erradicating the bone, or with your hand, or with any other cause by some instruments which you have equipped for it, as tweezers and forceps.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And consider that you guard with total caution so that the incision knife does not touch any cause of the brain.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And then when you have circuit the bone and it is separated from the brain if it is continued with it, draw that out, and polish and smooth that in the asperity of it of what is in the bone with another instrument similar to an incision knife but however be more thin and subtle than the other incision knives.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if you draw out any small pieces of the bones and jagged, then take that with facility with what is proper for you from the instruments; and then cure the wound with ligatures and bandages which we have said.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the other manner of operation is lighter and distant from fear, which Gualia says and it is called by great lawgiver; and this is its speech: It is necessary for you in the beginning that you begin to uncover the part of the bone of the location in which there is the fracture most vehement and most manifest, while when you have uncovered that part and you have paused below it the extremity of this incision knife slow and gentle, of which this is its form:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And it is that the lens is a lion and does not contain any cause, and the acute part is from him in two sides in front in length, as well as times; that the lens be adjusted to the head with the face of him incident acute in the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And then you pierce the scissors of one part with a small mallet inside so that they cut all bones with ease, just as they are turned, and you be sure of the membrane that nothing happens to him accidentally, in any way, and if the medicine was the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly, and if he was sleeping.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	If there is any cause attached to the bone of the membrane in any place of bones, cut that from him with the extremity of the scissors lenticular, and deliver that from him with ease, for he is delivered from it without harm and without fear.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the membrane, and what is cut off or damaged from the bone is the face of it, and remains in him roughness and small thorns, then cover that roughness and remove those thorns with sharp razors by which you have prepared the number, of various quantities so that it may be possible for you to administer some of them in every place of the most convenient ones, and the most right ones according to what you are led astray by your operation of that broken bone and its form.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And cover with your reason with which you shave the bone at the beginning of the sharpest side of those razors, and then use it with the most subtle one of it, and do not cease to do this according to continuity until you come to administer the thickest and the most subtle of all those.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	But in any other small capillary and subtle fractures, cover that they may be cured according to what you are led astray by the rectification of it.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And it is a cause that is not hidden from all those who have studied in that art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And we have written about what we have shown in great fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the membrane is stretched when you shave the bone, then take cloth according to the quantity of the wound, and soak that in rose oil, and place that over the hole of the wound; and then take another cloth folded or doubled and soak it in wine and rose oil and place that over the first cloth and do this most gently about that so that you do not disturb the head; and then administer on that lye, and do not tighten it except according to the quantity which the wound has so much.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And leave that with this cure for a day or two until you are sure of cauterized pus; and then unbind it and administer medicines with which there is superfluous dryness, such as lint and linseed flour, and powder of onions and of aristology, and of similar things to those.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And it is that you make of these medicines powder which is sprinkled on the wound as they are dried; and generally, administer in that all medicine of the property of which there is that it cleanses and does not bite.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And guard yourself according to your virtue that the wound in your cure is clean; and there should not be in it surdicia or other; nor do you leave an aggregate of virulence in it; for when it is applied over the membrane of the brain, it corrupts that and causes that, and a malicious malignancy happens about the patient.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And it happens in the head of the head, as the bone is cleansed and most when the cure of it is lessened, and there is blackness on the surface of it; and therefore consider then if these accidents happen to the patient, know that it is all because of you.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas .iii., e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if blackness does not happen except from the medicine that is placed above it, and it is because of that medicine that makes that blackness, then take honey a part and rose oil parts .iii., and with those line with a cloth, and then place that on the head; and then cure that with the spices of cure which is convenient so that it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter .iii.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	Of restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	Know that the nose is not broken except in two parts above most superior, or one of those some bent, because there are in it two bones, for the part below is cartilaginous, and is not broken and nothing happens to it except constriction and tortuosity and sinusitis.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	But if one of the two parts of it is broken, then take your index finger and insert that into your nose, and press that fracture inside with your index finger, and with your thumb push out, so that the nose returns according to its natural figure.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And let it be done by you with ease, and guard yourself so that pain does not occur to the patient because of that operation.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the highest part of the nose, and the finger does not reach that, then let it be split at its extremity where there is a little thickness.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in two parts, then you make the appearance of that.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And bind yourself to restore it on the first day of the fracture if possible; and if not, then you must let the wound rest for two or three days until the pus of the cauterized wound is dried up.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And then insert in the extremity of the nose a ball of cloth, if the fracture is in one part, or put in two balls, if the fracture is in two parts, and let there be thickness in the ball of so much quantity that it fills up the hole of the nose.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And some of the old restorers say that the balls be wrapped in lamb, and changed every day, but I have not seen it; they say let the ball be wrapped in almond milk with comfit flour with powder of moly; and then leave it so that the bone is made firm and the cartilage hardened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And sometimes there is inserted into the nose, instead of the ball, pine resin more than that which is wrapped in cloth of lion; and let there be the fracture of the nose most violent and the patient not prohibited from inspiration.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	And this cause is not necessary for you; and if you want, do that, and if you want, do balls.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if another cauterized wound happens, plaster the nose with cerate or with cotton soaked in wine and rose oil, or with diaquilon.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	But if cauterized wound does not happen, then take flour of sesames and powder of onions made with almond milk and place that above it, and put over it lint of lion, and do not bind the nose by any cause.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	But if the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or are crushed, then split them and extract them with instruments that are convenient for that; and then close the cut, and cure that with what incarnates and hardens, and with plasters according to what is convenient.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	And if a wound happens inside the nose, then cure that with balls and administer lead tubes so that it is completely healed.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter .iiii.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	Of restoration of the mandible when it is broken.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the mandible below is broken and the fracture of it has no pus, regard then if the fracture is only outside, and is not broken in two and is bent to the sides, then its sense is obscure.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	And therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, then insert your left index finger into the mouth of the patient; and similarly if the fracture is on the left mandible, then insert the index finger of the right hand; and drive with that the flexibility of the fracture inside with ease to the sides outside, with your other hand from the outside of the bone; thus you will bring it into a line.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	If the jaw is already separated into two parts, then you should administer an extension of two parts according to what is right, so that it can be healed properly.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if it happens that teeth are knocked out due to disruption, then strengthen those which you expect will remain, using gold or silver wire, or silk thread; and then apply a cerot to the broken jaw, and place a doubled-over drape on top, and place a large, decently-made plate, or a piece of wood equal in length to the jaw, on top of that; and then tie it all together according to how you are equipped to do so and according to what is convenient for the application, as long as it does not cause destruction.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And command the patient to rest and be still, and give him food in small amounts.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you think that the figure has been changed in any way, then on the third day, untie it and correct what is altered by applying a powder of linseed, egg white, or chickpea flour after removing the cerot, and place woolen cloth over it.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And then when the bandage is tight and adjusted over it, and the position of the bone is not altered, leave it, so as to not untie it until the fracture is healed and strong; for many times this fracture is healed within three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if it happens that an ulcer forms due to inflammation, then administer what we have said many times in the healing of it, so that the ulcer is healed and the swelling goes down.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is compound, then consider whether there is a piece of bone separated or protruding; then you should subtly apply pressure on those protrusions with what is convenient in the removal of those using instruments.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the opening of the wound is narrow, then you should widen it with a bloodletting instrument according to the amount of your need.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And then when you have removed those protrusions and there is no inflammation remaining, you should close the opening of the wound if it is wide; and if not, place one of the bandages that is convenient for that over it and let it heal.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	On the restoration of the clavicle when it is dislocated.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	Many times the clavicle on the front side of the chest is broken due to a blow by a muscle, and that fracture occurs in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	For it may be broken, or separated into two parts without protrusions occurring; and it is easier to restore it; or it occurs with protrusions, and its restoration is more difficult; or the fracture is compound.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And the operation on it, when the fracture is compound, is that you have two assistants, so that one holds the joint and follows the broken clavicle, and the other extends the collar bone towards that side.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	And then join the fracture with the ligature threads so that it is made in the shape of a collar bone according to how it should be, and there is not a slight protuberance or concavity.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if it needs more extension, then you should place below the patient's armpit a bandage or woolen cloth, and its size should be according to the amount of your need; and extend and elevate the clavicle and constrict the bandage with your hand so that it joins the fracture as it should.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot pull the end of the clavicle towards the outside due to the chest being in the way, then the patient should be bent over at the neck, and place a cushion under their chest, and another cushion halfway down their back.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the assistant should press the muscle towards the bottom ends so that the clavicle bone is elevated upwards from within, and then you should correct the fracture and join it with ligature threads.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	But if you feel protrusions from the clavicle and they are swollen, then cut over them and extract those protrusions with ease.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is retained in the bone, then you should make an incision over it with one of the instruments which you have equipped yourself for this purpose, after having placed beneath the clavicle the instrument that serves the head; and it is a wooden or iron instrument, of which this is the shape:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And it is like a chisel of which this is the concavity; and its width should be according to what you have need of it, according to the size of the bone or its weakness.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	But its length should be according to what you are able to do in the operation; and it should have two ends, one wide and the other narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the opening of the wound which you have incised when you have extracted the protrusion of the bone is wide, and there is no threat of an ulcer, then you should bring together the two lips of the wound with a suture.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the opening is small, or you fear an ulcer, then you should fill the wound with bandages and powders according to the amount of the opening of the wound.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if it happens that an ulcer forms, then soak a bandage in warm vinegar and rose oil and place it over the ulcer.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	But the compression of the bone when it is compound and sectioned is that you place a bandage made from linseed flour with egg white over the ulcer, and place a sponge under the armpit, and then place a bandage under the arm if it needs it; and then place a humid cloth on it, so as to not conceal anything from you; and then place a bandage over it, and wrap that bandage around the collar bone with the cloth so that it is placed over the site of the fracture; and then place a humid cloth as it becomes warm, and wind that around the collar bone and under the armpit on both sides, and reduce it to all sides, and when the compression of the fracture with compression decreases in descent, and that is what does not become concealed from you.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And all of this should not be swollen over the broken bone; and therefore you should examine the patient every day, for when the binding is softened or you see the cloth already swollen, then you should correct that and tighten the binding.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And then place the patient' sleep on their chest, and place a cushion under their armpit from which they are sleeping at night, so that with that the support of them is raised from the side of it, and therefore the fracture of the collar bone is raised in elevation of the muscle; or their arm is bound to their neck.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not untie the binding if it does not happen in the place definitely or an ulcer forms, until after twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And then renew the bandage if you have seen it become loose, and tighten in compression and restore that and leave it until it is restored and the fracture of the collar bone is coagulated.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it is strengthened and comforted according to the month in 28 days, and in some people it is done in less time than that.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter 6.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	On the restoration of a fracture of the shoulder.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The spatula bone is broken at its broad end and not at its narrow end but at its edges.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And therefore when it is broken at its broad end — and is broken at its narrow end — and it is not dislocated but by contact, then according to the shape of the fracture being broken you should make the preparation of it and reduce it according to the natural figure in every way that it is possible for you.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	And then apply a powder made of ground-up egg whites and stopped lion's teeth over the area, then sprinkle double-folded cloth over it, and finally place a thin layer of table salt on top, according to the amount of the spatula or a little more.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	But if the salt has sunk into any of the spatula's indentations, then fill those indentations with stopped lion's teeth and level off the salt according to its equality.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And then strengthen it with a long, decently tight bandage and the firm placing of the salt so that it is not moved from its place.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And examine the bandage every day; and whenever it becomes soft, replace it with another bandage and tighten it and apply more salt if it has been moved from its place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And lay the patient on his side.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	And the spatula is restored in twenty days or less.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And so when this number is completed, then you must dissolve the bandage, and know that it is safe for the bones from which its beginning is not feared nor their dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if the process of the bone is pressing on the spot and you put the chain underneath it, then you must cut into it, pierce it, and act according to what we have said in the fracture of the furcula of suppuration of pus if this happens here.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter 7.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	On the restoration of a broken foot.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The foot is sometimes broken in the middle of it and this causes pain there, but its ends are usually crushed and broken down.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And in the accidents of it when its middle is broken, there is decline to the parts within and pain occurs in it, difficulty in walking, cough, strong fever and vomiting of blood; and a cavity is revealed in the broken bone and is not hidden from sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And its restoration is that the patient be laid on his back, and a cushion placed between his shoulders; and then press upon the muscles of it, and adjust the ribs of it with the hands of two assistants, and apply pressure gently in the operation of it and in the adjustment according to all manner that is possible and convenient for him, so that the figure of the bone returns according to its nature.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	And then apply plaster and gauze over it and place on top of it a thin layer of table salt or chalk or something similar in weight, after you wrap that in cloth; and then gently tighten it around the broken bone so that it is not moved; and sometimes press its back into the roundness of the back with decent pressure; and consider the bandage all the time, and when it becomes soft, tighten it.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	And if necessity demands the removal of that which provokes pus or pricking, or pain, or suppuration that occurs in the spot, then you cut and loosen it and remove the plaster and rectify that which happens by means of its cure; and then reduce the plaster, if you see fit to do so, and adjust the pressure on him so that he is healed.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 8.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	On the restoration of ribs when they are cracked.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	Know that a fracture of the ribs does not occur except in large spots that follow the spine, and from their ends to the front, it does not happen to them except those which are cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And its knowledge is not hidden from sensation because of the examination of it by the fingers.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And its restoration is that you close the fracture with the fingers according to the possible manner so that it is wrapped according to its nature, and then plaster and tighten the broken bone if pus comes from it.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And if the fracture of the ribs is declining to the parts within, then there occurs in the patient violent pain and piercing, also as piercing that which occurs in him who has pleurisy, and because of it there is difficulty in breathing, cough, and vomiting of a lot of blood; and this is of difficult cure.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And the Antixs are born in her with sick children.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And from them are born: that which you pause for the patient who engenders inflammation and swollen condition, so that his belly may be inflated and extended, and the fracture is driven to the parts outside.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	But we fear that for this there is not the cause to generate suppuration of pus if it does not occur; and if it does occur, then help it.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And some of them say that it is laid upon him wind and then that it sucks strength; and it is like reasoning, but nevertheless it is feared that the wind may throw out the superfluities to the spot because of weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	And some of them say: that the spot be covered with wool which has been submerged in hot oil, and that powdery bandages be placed between the ribs so that it may be filled, and then that the bandage is wrapped around him according to its roundness; and then let the patient be cured by means of poultice of food and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if it causes violent constriction of the patient and he does not suffer, and the bone pierces his veil with piercing pain, we fear for the patient, then cut on the spot, uncover from the cracked rib, and then place upon it an instrument that conserves the phlegm, the memory of which is preceded; and pierce the bone with ease, and extract that.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And then let us adjust the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with cauterization, and cure it with bandages so that it may be healed.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if suppuration occurs within it, then you cut and pour powders in rosin oil and place on the spot, and let him be cured by that which causes the suppuration within the teeth.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And let him lie on his side over which he slept so that it may be healed.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter 9.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	On the restoration of a fracture of the spine and collar bone.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Sometimes a fracture occurs in the bones of the collar, and they are crushed and broken down, and similarly to the vertebrae of the spine.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And if this occurs to someone and you want to know whether it will be healed or not, then consider the following: for if you see the fingers already soft and stupified and dead and cannot move them nor straighten them out, nor tighten them with your fingers or sting them with a needle without sensation, then you may know that it is not healed; and in the middle of their disposition it is deadly.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if they are not soft but feel constriction in them with the fingers and piercing pain, then you may know that the nut of the bone is safe and that the patient will be cured by means of a cure.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you see the vertebrae of the collar like that and want to know whether it will be healed or not, then consider its feet.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	Now if you see that they are already soft, it occurs to those which is occurred in the fingers, and then when he lies on his back, loses windiness and egestion according to his will, and sometimes is resupinated over his back and wants to urinate but cannot, then you may know that it is deadly, so do not trouble yourself with its cure.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	But if none of these occurs, the cause is better and less dangerous.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And its cure is that you pierce with the needle of the suppuration of pus that you place on the cracked vertebra with hot rosin oil, or with seeds of houseleek; place upon it some times a day as long as the suppuration lasts.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And then apply one of the comforting and strengthening plasters to that area; and command the patient to rest and stay calm, and not to sleep on the side where he feels pain until he is healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if it happens that the wound of the shoulder or any other cause has separated from him, then cover the wound and close the bone; and approximate the two lips of the wound with a suture, if it is large; and cure the wound with an application of a suitable ointment until it heals.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	But if the rear of the shoulder bone is broken, and it is the end of the wound, then cover that you insert the little finger of the left hand in the anus, and grasp the broken bone with the other hand as much as possible by a second motion; and apply plaster and splints to it, if needed, and strengthen it.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel broken bones in him, then cover it and close it, and cure the wound with the cure that has preceded it until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10:
De restauracio de la ancha.	On the restoration of width.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the hips are often broken, and when they are broken, their fracture is nothing more than a separation at their ends, and they are sunken in length and decline to the inner parts; and it happens to the patient pain in the location and puncturing, and the leg is stupified when it is fractured.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And its restoration is that you extend your hand over it so that it is above the fracture as it is the figure of it.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	And if the fracture is only at its end, then grasp it according to what appears to you by a motion of grasp so that it is assembled to its natural figure.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	But if the fracture is in the length or that which declines to the inner parts below, then make the patient lie on his belly so that you are prepared for the restoration of that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And therefore when you have grasped it, apply plaster to it, and place upon it a splint of wood or of gut, and strengthen it by compression over which you do not fear puncture of fracture nor removal of the splint.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And grasp the cavity with that which fills it so that it takes the compression according to equality, and command the patient to sleep on his back or on his side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	But if it happens that there is suppuration of pus, then cease from extension of it and its restoration until the suppuration of pus is settled, and apply to it that which sedates that suppuration according to what has preceded; and then return to its restoration, and strengthen it thus.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if it happens in the shoulder bones or are comminuted, then treat them.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11:
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	On the restoration of the fracture of the elbow.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	The elbow is what is between the arm pit and the head of the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is broken, then its restoration is in one of two manners, of which the one is that you take wood plank of moderate thickness according to this form:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And they are tied at their two ends with two lengths of rope, and it is suspended from the elevated location.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And make the patient lean on a stool; and then bend his broken arm over the wood so that it comes to the tip of it in the middle location from which is attached the curve of the wood.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And then have someone suspend over it some heavy cause, or the minister extend that to the inner parts below; and then the doctor and his assistants press the fracture with their hands, so that the fracture returns according as it should.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And the other manner is that the patient be reclined on his neck and suspend his arm from his shoulder with rope; and then command two ministers, one of whom holds what is above the fracture with his hands, and the other holds what is below him; and each of them extends to his side.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want the extension to be stronger, then strengthen the fracture with rope and that which is above it with another rope, and each of the two ministers extend to their two sides.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And therefore if the fracture is near to the end of the muscle, then let half of the rope be paused over the tip and the other below the fracture from the arm pit.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And likewise if the fracture is near to the arm pit, then let the rope be paused over that location and over that arm pit.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Grasp that with facility and without pain, and then when it is grasped according as it should and is applied by good application, then strengthen that if suppuration of pus does not happen.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	But if suppuration of pus happens, then cease the compression until the seventh day, and apply to it wool cloth dipped in wine and rose oil so that the suppuration rests, and then strengthen it.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	And the manner of strengthening that is that you apply plaster to the fracture, and then place wrapping of new cloth over the plaster; and then adjust the arm upon that elbow, and pause your open hand over his muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And pause the cloth and strengthen the elbow of the arm so that the arm is in place of splints, if not prohibited by anything of the broken bone.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And then use splints.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And it is that you pause upon the fracture that splint which is more loaded and stronger of the other splints; and pause between each splint the breadth of a finger, and let the length of the splints be according to the fracture with addition of three fingers of all parts.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And then strengthen over the splints with the compression which was said at the beginning of the chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And it is that your compression over the location of the fracture be more strict.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And when the fracture is lengthened, then let the compression be less.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And therefore if you see the placement of the splints and the compression thus as we have said in the hour in which you restore the member to its position, then do.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear suppuration of pus, then cease the compression and the splints until the seventh day as we have said.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And then consider the rope in all parts for three days so that no pain comes in the location or inflammation; or is prohibited food coming to the member by disposition of superfluity of compression; and then rectify all that according as we have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	But if you are over confidence that nothing of that happens, then do not cease the ligature except after three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And let his sleep be on his back, and his hands be over his stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And pause over the elbow woolen cloth wound around it, and consider throughout the hour of the night or day that it is not loosed nor dissolved the figure of the broken member, or that the rope be molified, then rectify all that with your skill.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And pause the food of the patient according to the order which we have given before, so that the food be subtle in the beginning so that it is begun strengthening; and then let it grow larger.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	The custom of the elbow and of his arm is that they are bound for xl days; and then let them be loosed and a bath be administered and it be medicated with ointments which rectify that.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is healed, then do not cease from that the rope and the splints until a day or two months.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter 12:
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	On the restoration of a broken arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The arm consists of two bones which are called two rays; one of which is small and it is that which is located at the tip of the fingers, and the other is large and is that which is placed below the small one, from the part further down.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And very often only the greater ray is broken, or the smaller one, and very rarely are they both broken at the same time.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when the smaller ray is broken above, its restoration is easier and its healing quicker.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when it's broken below, its fracture is more serious and its healing more difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And the worst of all is when both bones are broken at the same time.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore, if the bone which is broken is the smaller one above, then it is convenient for the doctor to put a small extension with ease into that area so that it can be splinted.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	But if it's the greater ray which is broken, then he should put a more forceful extension.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both rays are broken at the same time, then you must put on the splint with the most strength.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And you must put the hand position for its restoration and extension spread out on a pillow, with the palm of the hand to the upper parts, more above all the others fingers, and the auricular finger lower than the other fingers, and the patient lying on his back on a raised pillow.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And there should be a pillow beneath him in the height or angle of his body, so that he does not suffer pain.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	Then the assistant extends the arm from the lower part with his hand or with a bandage, and another assistant extends above in the same way.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	And then the doctor splints the bone so that it is reduced according to the best possible figure.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if in the structure of the bone there are knots, then you must reduce all pressure on it with your strength.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if it appears on him separated knots which push the tendon and you don't have hope in its restoration, then you must operate on it and stop that according to the manner we've said above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	But if the fracture is with pus, I have already made a chapter about that in particular, and so take the cure of that.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if an abscess comes at the beginning of your restoration, then you must line a cloth with cerot made of rose oil and white wax, and it should be medium between thickness and thinness, and stretch the cloth tightly over that abscess so that the abscess yields; and then remove the cerot and apply plaster prepared from powdered mulberry wood with honey, and then put on poultices; and the poultice which is put over that fracture should be larger and stronger.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And know that the number of the arm's stars are seen in the major dispositions, or whether it is a fracture in one ray or in both rays at the same time.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	And then put your splint over the area of the fracture more strongly and more forcefully, and if you see more swelling at the upper parts of the fracture or at its lower parts, put on the splint a little more loosely according to how it is preceded by its remembrance in the beginning of the chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the cloths which are wrapped over the fracture should be soft and moistened, and not hard or rough, and the thread with which it is tightened should be of a medium between thin and thick, just as we have recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	And consider the member and the bandage again after a few days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if any cause happens which necessitates a correction, just as it happens to the member, and then you must bathe the member with warm water so that that swelling stops.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And leave the member not constricted while he rests, and then return the splint.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the splint is already loosened and the bone is healed and like those, then correct all that with your strength.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And consider also if the nourishment is prohibited from coming to the member because of the excess of the splint, then you must loosen that a little and leave it for a few days so that it runs to that member, and then tighten it.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	But if to the patient no happens any cause of those we've said, then there is no need for it to be loosed within about 20 days or more of those.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And then the hand of the patient should be suspended by its power from motion, and make him sleep on his back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	And know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or in 32 days, or very often it is restored in 28 days, and all that is according to the disposition of the complications and dispositions of strength.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter 13.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	On the restoration of the fracture of the wrist and fingers.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	Know that in the wrist and knuckles of the fingers there is a certain fracture, and there does not happen to them except many times repeated.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when there happens to the hand fracture or sprain, then the patient should lie on his back and his hands be spread according to equality, and then put his hand over that extended one.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	Then the assistant extends the broken bones and the doctor splints them so they are aligned with good alignment.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And then you must put plaster and lint if there is no abscess, and then put a poultice over that according to the quantity of the place, and you have already wrapped it in a moist cloth.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	But if the fracture is in the parts of the fingers towards the belly of the palm, then make a bandage like a tourniquet, and command the patient to tighten that with his palm fractured; then it should be tightened with a long cloth.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And the cloth of the body with which it is lifted so that the body is applied to the palm; and tighten that according to how it should be.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	But if the fracture is towards the outer parts, then you must put a poultice over that and another poultice over the part below in the palm so that the hand is open and straight; and then put on the splint, just as the hand is turned to the side between the fingers with bandages.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	And if there is fracture in any of the fingers of the fingers, then if it's the finger that pushes, it should be splinted according to how it should be and then it should be tightened with the palm and if you want, put a small poultice straight so that the fracture is raised and not bent.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	But if the fracture is in the other fingers, just as in that of the middle, or in the index, or in the auricular, or in the ring finger, then it should be splinted and tied with the finger which touches it; or they are all tied according to continuation, and it is better; or put a small poultice over that, just as we've said about the pusher.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider in your restoration and then that, the disposition of abscess cauterization — by the operation of it — by what it is repeated his narration.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter 14.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	On the restoration of the fracture of the bone of the thigh.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The bone of the thigh many times is broken and is revealed to feeling according to how it is turned towards the front and to the upper part.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	And its restoration is done so that the bandage is tightened over the fracture and another bandage below the fracture, and the patient lies on his back and on his face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	And then the minister extends all the ligament to its end according to its quality when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	But if it is near the root of the head, then the ligament near the nostril should be extended to the part of the penile bone, in order that the extension may draw it upwards, and the other ligament below the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And likewise if the break is near the nostril, then the ligament near the nostril should be extended and the extension to the parts below.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And then the doctor should reduce the bone with both hands until it is reduced according to its natural appearance and the bones are joined by a good union; then he should apply an ointment and a tight bandage if there is no sign of inflammation in the limb.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	But if there is inflammation in it, then you should leave it for several days until the inflammation subsides, and then return to your cure.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The bandage should be applied like this: fold a hard bandage over the fracture two or three times and soak up the excess fluid; then wrap the leg so that it reaches from the foot to the root of the head.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And insert long feathers between the head and the leg near the nostril to the parts below; then the ends of the feathers should come from the highest part of both parts, and then you should wrap around the leg and head what is left of the bandage.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And then place a splint over the fracture on the head and another splint over the bone of the leg.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	And then fill the spaces between the leg and the head with soft rags so that the bandage is coagulated.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And then begin with a strong bandage over the fracture using three or four bandages; and as you go further from the fracture site, your bandage should be weaker, longer, and softer.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	And then extend both ends of the feathers to the parts below until it reaches the ankle of the foot; and tighten both ends of the splints on the other side so that the ligament is not pushed from its place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And then let the bandage be over that in such a way that there is no sign of inflammation or suppuration or swelling in the limb; and if any of those things occur, then you should loosen it, and correct what has occurred according to what we have said several times.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	But if there is an injury to the bone that you can reduce, then you should reduce it according to what is possible for you; and if not, leave it and treat it with what has been mentioned before so that it heals.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And in some cases this fracture of the thigh is strengthened with splints on both sides as we have said for the arm and the forearm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	However, when it is restored in this way there is no sign of limping in the patient; and if it is restored alone, then it is necessary that the other leg limp as well.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And know that the thigh is strengthened in 40 days or a little more or less, and all of that is according to the variety of the complications and other dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the nostril.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	Know that the fracture of the nostril is sharp and deep; but it happens to it many times tension.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	But if there is a fracture, then it is not more than a crack or cut in its parts; and that is on the skin or under the skin, and over that all is covered by a membrane.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And its restoration is such that what is broken in its parts is reduced by the fingers until it is aggregated and joined according to what is possible by action, facility, and fabrication.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	And then apply an ointment and place a round splint over it if necessary; and tighten it above with a bandage as is convenient.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	And then consider all the dispositions which we have mentioned in other fractures; as suppuration occurs and likewise to those in which there is no sign of inflammation, doing to it whatever is convenient for its healing.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter 16
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the leg.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	Know that in the leg there are two bones of which one is large and is called by the name of the leg; and the other is slender and is called the shin.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And it happens to both kinds of fracture what happens in the arm; and its restoration is such that the restoration of the arm is done by reduction, and the operation of it is one.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if both bones are broken together, then the leg is split into all parts.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if only the more slender bone is broken, then the leg is split in front.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if only the larger bone is broken, then it is bent below and is of those causes which are not under your control.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	And then administer extension and action and liaison of the splints according to that reduction.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	However, if the fracture of the leg is oblique having many splinters, then let the extension be less and weaker, and draw it away with your strength.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And if there is any cause for an operation on the leg, and when you reduce the splints and complete all your operation, then you shall take lengths of pine wood which have been paused below the causes which have been paused in soliders, and made evenly with white poplar; lengthen them so that they are small, not a lot of them, and not be a finger-width apart, and their length according to the length of the leg from the front to the back.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And then wrap around each one in two bandages according to the length of it; and pause one over the part of the leg from one side and the other from the other side, and let them be from the front to the back at the bottom of the ankle of the foot.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	And then tie the two splints in three places from both ends and at the middle point; by this bandage the leg is prohibited from bending to the right and left side, and stands in good position.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And then a wooden brace according to the length of the leg is administered; and let the leg be paused in it so that it conserves its movement.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And most importantly you shall do this in fracture, and when that is suppurating properly.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And then consider the leg every day and study it with final study, and guard it from suppuration and inflammation and other similar causes; and if any of those things occur, then you shall treat it with what is convenient for its healing.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter 17
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	Of the fracture of the ankle and the bones of the foot and the toes.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	The ankle does not suffer fracture at all; but the bones of the foot suffer fracture in some ways; and the toes of the foot suffer fracture seldom, and do not suffer except by accident during the time of disposition.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if the bones of the foot are broken and those bones are raised on each other, then let the patient rest his foot on the ground prepared thus with a pillow.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	And then pause one foot over those bones and press them and reduce them into their places; and when they are reduced, then twist them in their places.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	Then apply a plaster and a bandage on top of it, and place below the belly of the foot a small board with two holes in it.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	Then stretch that leg down while you have wrapped it in clothes and other materials that cause heat.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And when three or four days have passed, then you should loosen the bandage, for you will find that the bones are swollen, or broken or displaced, and the operation on them is as follows.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	But if anyone says that they are broken, then restore them and join them together as I described to you in the restoration of the fingers of the hand.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	Then place a splint on the broken finger according to its length and have it bound a little tightly; then below the foot place that board which I described to you, and stretch that leg down while binding it tightly.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	But if what is broken of the bones is two or three or more, then you should place on each finger a splint of its size wrapped in lion's cloth; and stretch the board below the foot, and let it stand on one of the board's holes so that it has good retention.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is convenient for you not to forget that you do not consider all the causes that are given to you in other fractures of the accidents that we have said; and pay attention to any accident with what covers it.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter .xviii.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	Of fracture of the pubic bone and of the bone of the penis and of the woman's clitoris.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the pubic bone is broken, then make that woman lie on her back, and tilt her pelvis slightly to one side, and let it be held there.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And let the midwife fill the pubic bone with cotton, and let it be done in the man' same way with spermaceti; and let the woman be pressed upon, and let her pelvis be raised little by little, for all that is forgotten when she is face down so that the broken bone returns.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And let powder be placed on her back, and when she wants to urinate let the cotton be moistened with facilidade, and let her urinate, and reduce it and return in the same way as before, and let her return to her first powder.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And do this for seven days or around that, for it is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you want, take a bladder of sheep and stretch over the wound a catheter of wool; and insert the whole bladder into the pubic bone, and let it be insufflated through the catheter with air so that the bladder is inflated inside the bone, for the fracture returns.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And let it be filled with spermaceti and stay there for a few days as we have recommended so that it heals.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the bone of the penis of a man or woman is broken, then administer in its restoration and piercing what we have recommended for the bone of the hip.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And that which is straight does not hide in these nearby fractures and which few understand, especially those who have some study and understanding of this my book; for that fracture instructs you on the major dispositions through a direct path in its restoration and stricture, and therefore understand well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	But in the clitoris of a man when it is broken, take a whetstone of ash, and place the clitoris in that; then place on it a binding of cloth, and let it be bound, and let it be left for three days or around that time, and let it heal.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter .xix.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	Of the restoration of a fracture of the bones when there is pus.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient for those to whom fractures happen with pus, especially if the bone is large like the bone of the thigh or the adductor, or similar to that, that you take care and phlebotomize them as soon as the conditions of phlebotomy testify to you, as we have said above.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the pus flows out with blood, then understand that you take care to retain it there as you pulverize on it dried triphylite, unless another cause is present.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And let the restoration of the fracture begin in that same day and do not prolong it if an abscess does not happen.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	But if an abscess happens, then let the restoration of it be left until the sixth day, so that the abscess has ceased; and do not approach it on the third or fourth day, for you will cause harmful accidents.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	But if the broken bone is prominent over the uncovered tendon, then understand that you pierce it and reduce it by joining them with your hands with ease and little extension.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	But if extension is not prepared for you and the equation of it by your hands, then let it be reduced by your hands with this instrument; and the instrument which is made of iron, whose length is seven or eight digits and whose breadth is according to the amount of pus, and it is necessary for the physician to take one of those three or four according to the amount that occurs in the cure in all kinds of fractures.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And let it be round and have little thickness so that it is not bent by the pressure upon it in the hour of the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And let its tip be acute to which the edges are attached; and let it be of thick thickness above, and of thin thickness within at the ends.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is the shape of it:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	And it is called in Greek "labrys vlantz ate-larem", and it is a little palette.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	So that the acute end of it is placed elevated over the prominent end of the bone.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And press upon it in a wet way so that the bone returns, and let it be joined with some equation.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And therefore try to join the ends of the fracture between them, and if the end of it broken is thin, and do not take the instrument for a good perspective, then understand that you insert the end of that bone so that the instrument has power over it.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	But if you cannot reduce the bone in any way we have recommended, then insert it with whatever is convenient for it from the incision points we have said; or saw it with one of the saws in whatever way is possible for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	And let what rises in the bone of roughness and of small scars be shaved off.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone is reduced and especially the reduction causes violent pain in the wound, then know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; therefore do this which gives great benefit to the patient.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When your restoration which you do to the bone is completed, and especially let the dressing be submerged in black styptic wine, and properly if it is summer, and do not place on the pus wax nor another cause of which oil is made so that no fever and corruption happen in it.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And let splints be administered in the hour of your completion of the restoration of the bone and let the pus be uncovered so that you insert the wound with forceps and use bandages according to the amount of the pus.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And guard yourself from all carelessness so that you do not tighten the pus with the fracture, for many times this has been done by foolish physicians and they caused on their patients death or corrosion or putrefaction, therefore it is a fault.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	If his tightness was lighter, softer, different from the tightness of other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the wound is large or is a bad wound, and you fear over that certain bad accidents which we have mentioned, and you feel pain in the place, then do not cover over that with bandages, but rather make a wrapping of hard cloths in place of bandages and tighten him with those.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And when after a day or two the wound begins to heal, and pus has formed in it, then you take off the cloth which you placed over that, and you apply poultices with which according to our custom we treat wounds, like tetratapharmacon and similar to that.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	And it is fitting for you to loosen the ligature and examine the wound every day morning and evening until it is consolidated and closed, and that the member be prepared in such a way that the pus runs off from it with ease.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If the wound passes many days and is not consolidated nor is the pus discharged from it, then know that here are some small things because of which one must probe the wound with a tent.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And of those things which are separated and extracted, those which are not separated and put in the member and cause pain, pierce them as is possible for you to do.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	And if it happens that the wound becomes swollen or turns yellow, there is stoma, or another kind of corruption and putrefaction, then you must treat each one with what is fitting for it according to its cure, of which a narrative precedes in its chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o .xxx.; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And about this on which I will dwell and you must weigh your decision: when the bones are broken, they protrude from the member like the bones of the hip and the helper, and similarly to those of the large members, and you must not presume attraction or extraction of it, nor the extraction of it many times happened by which death; leave that alone so that pus can flow out, for often it will fall on its own after about 20 or 30 days; and then cure the wound if you see it, and if not, leave that.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	Of the cure of a lump which happens in the path of any fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Many times this lump happens in the path of healing of a fracture, and mostly it is near the joints, and because of it the figure of the member is altered; and often it prohibits the member from its natural operation.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Therefore consider if the lump is recent and administer in that medicine which has tightened like aloe, and myrrh, and mastic, and cress, and similar to those; so you take some or all of those, and mix them with wine vinegar, or with white wine, and place that on the lump on a piece of cloth, and tighten that around it with good constriction.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	And leave the constriction so that you do not loosen it for many days; and then loosen it and repeat another, while the lump is softened; or tighten over that a sheet of lead descendingly, because lead has property of softening everything which is swollen in the members.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if the lump is already turned to stone and it is hard and necessity forces you to cut that tightly, then split that through the part which is most above it, and pierce the superfluity and protruding, or cut that with any resector until it is softened; and cure that until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	Of restoration of a fracture when it is restored and then the member becomes subtle and frail not according to its nature.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture is restored, and then the member becomes subtle and frail, then that is not made except for many causes: of which one cause is multitude of swelling of the ligature and of the binding of it made not as it should; or by superfluity of constriction of the ligaments within which the nourishment is prohibited from running to the member; or by multitude of superfluous embrocation; or by superfluous movement not in its hour; or by weakness of blood in the body of the patient and because of frailty of him.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	And cure of that is to make the patient eat and to make his heart tender so that blood is multiplied in him; and administer a bath; and put cow's milk and leticia on it.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	And then place plaster on the member, so that the plaster draws to it much nourishment, or continue embrocation of it with lukewarm water, while the nourishment runs and returns to its natural figure.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	Of cure of the broken bones when they are restored tortuously and prohibit the operation of them from what they should do.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When it happens to the member already restored in the healing of its tortuosity and eminence to the broken bone and lump, and it is because of the form of the member, but however the member is not prohibited from its natural operation, therefore you must not take the word of one who examines that member as though it were newly broken.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	But already many foolish doctors and restorators have done that in our land; and this operation is very blameworthy, presenting great fear whose sign is deadly.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	But if claudication and lump are recent, then let them be embrocated with lukewarm water in which soft herbs are cooked, like leaves of alder and roots of it, and mallow, and similar to those; and let an ointment be made from it with soft-making oil; or let it be moistened with mucilage of root of alder and be cooled with cotton wool or with linseed oil, and let it be plastered with that; or let them be applied fat figures and tied with the feathers of a pigeon, and similar to those of the medicines which are named brother's consolidator.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And sometimes it is dissolved by continual gentle friction which is made with the hands moistened, and let the member be moved throughout in all hours.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	But if the tortuosity is gone in front and is made strong and turned to stone and caused necessity of cure of it by iron, then let the pus be above dried up and the continuation of the bone be dissolved, and let that which is superfluous of lump of that bone with subtile incisors, and let facility be administered in that with solicitude and study.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter 23
De sermo en dislocacio.	Of speech in dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is displacement of one of the joints of its place, by which it is prohibited from movement, and the figure of the member is altered, and brings upon the patient great pains and injuries.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore when it happens to any dislocation, then let it be reduced as quickly as possible, and do not delay its reduction, because if it is delayed, the joint is apoplectic and very difficult to reduce dislocation.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And for that reason do not let it be softened nor stretched in the hour of apoplexy, because many times it brings on spasms and pains.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	But when that happens, then let you take care of the phlebitis of the patient, and then let it be left so that the apoplexy rests; and then the member is embrocated with tepid water and oil, and then let it be reduced with ease.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And each member is cured according to that of which the reminder will come in its place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And you have arranged the chapters of dislocation according to that which is preceded in fracture, from the uppermost part of the body towards the lowermost part.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXIV.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	Of the cure of dislocation of the jaw below.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	The two jaws are dislocated if they do not grind their teeth; and the dislocation of both occurs in one of two ways: either they are slightly loosened from their joints by a slight movement, and are slightly softened; or they are completely dislocated and fully completed, while they are softened at the beginning of the joint between them, so that saliva runs from the patient's mouth and he cannot close his mouth, and his tongue is wrapped in his speech.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	But when the dislocation of him is slight, then in the best dispositions it returns by itself for some slight cause.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	But if the dislocation is complete and full, then it must be administered quickly, and not delayed at all.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And it is that the minister holds the head of the patient, and the doctor inserts his right finger into the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the patient's mouth if the dislocation is on one side; or he inserts his two fingers together, if the dislocation is on both sides, and the others hold his hands outside which grip; and command to the patient that he cease his jaws and release them from every part; and the doctor grips the jaw and splints it until it returns to its place.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if it is difficult to reduce him, and especially if both jaws are dislocated, then administer evaporation with water and oil, while the reduction of both is made easier and not delayed at all, as we have said.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And when they return and are bound, and the mouth of the patient is closed and not softened, then place on them a powder of linen with cerotum, and let it be made of wax and rose oil; and let it be bound easily with soft ligatures.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And let the patient sleep on his back, and let his head be standing between two pillows, so that he does not grind his teeth to the right or left; and do not force him to chew anything for any cause; let his food be lion's milk, while when the pains are loosened and the jaws are sore, then he grinds what he wants.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And let this be administered easily, and do not labor over the opening of the mouth after eating and drinking and resting, while the jaw is sore and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if it is difficult to reduce two jaws when they are dislocated at any time and do not return to their places, then many times a fever comes suddenly and there is a continuous heat, and the belly of the patient is very hot, and very often he vomits pure bile.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you see this, then you know that it is perilous; and many times he dies within ten days who has this.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	Of the reduction of the dislocation of the collarbone and the end of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The collarbone is not dislocated from the side within through its continuity with the foot; and sometimes it is dislocated at the outer end, and this is indicated by sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And its restoration is that the patient lies on his back and extends his arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	Then press the joint with your palm with strong compression, for it will return.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And let a plaster and powder be placed on it and strengthen that.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	But the end of that which is connected to the shoulder and continued from it, is not dislocated on any day; then let it be reduced and bound as we have said and as your apparatus is prepared.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And let a plaster, powder, and bandage be placed on it, and command the patient to adhere to tranquillity and rest until he is healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And with this medical treatment, the end of the muscle is reduced when separated from its place.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	Of the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	Know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, of which one is that it is dislocated at the end of the breastbone towards the lower part.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is that it is dislocated at the top of the muscle, and this is done tightly; and it is not dislocated at the sides by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated in front by the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And especially it is dislocated and exits below at the ends of the breastbone, and especially in those whose flesh is thin, it is dislocated easily; but in those in whom there is much flesh, it exits out with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And very often occurs in some men a blow or a fall, and the muscle of him is apoplectic from apoplexy, and it is swollen because of this, although he is already dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Therefore, you must examine this while you are on top of him, and then proceed in his treatment.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And the dislocation of it is known when it is at the ends below the breastbone; so that you distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the normal muscle, for you will see manifest difference among them; and you will feel in the head of the muscle concavity and above the breastbone from the touch of the head of the muscle as a hollow, and to the patient cannot reduce his hand to his shoulder, nor move that by any movement.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is dislocated behind or inside, and you then feel manifest touch, and it is not hidden.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And the reduction of this dislocation is made easier when it is fresh and the patient is an infant.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction of it is that the minister raises the hand of him to the ends above; and let the attendant place his hands under the breastbone of him, and raise the joint with strength into its place, and the minister raises the hand of him, and extends it above; and let him then lower that below so that it returns easily.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	But if by what we have said it does not return, and it has started from the beginning that the dislocation occurred, many days, then let the patient be bathed in warm water and be administered fomenting which softens and loosens as though his joints were cut with a razor, and fenugreek, and honey in water, and let it be administered.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	And then let the patient lie on his back and let him extend his arm below the breastbone of him, and wait with wool that it returns between elevation and compression; and let the doctor hold his shoulder, and raise the head of the muscle with strength, and pull the hand of the patient so that he does not grind his teeth at the ends, and let the other minister hold the head of the patient, so that he does not grind his teeth at the ends, for then it will return to its place.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you wish, reduce him according to this manner: and it is that you make present one man who is longer than the patient, and let him be on the patient's side, and let him insert his muscle under the breastbone of the patient and raise the breastbone of him above while the patient is suspended in the air, and let the other minister pull the hand of the patient from the ends of his belly.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	But if the patient is light, then let him who for another cause be suspended, so that it is heavy, for then the dislocation will return at once.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And it is reduced likewise according to another manner: and it is that a long post be placed on the ground whose head is round in shape, not thick nor slender, and then let him who is under the patient; let cloths be placed on the head of the post, and let the patient stand according to the length of the post, and then let his hand be extended from the ends of the other side with strength, for then the joint will return to its place quickly.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	If it is difficult to reduce it for all the reasons that we have mentioned, then use this treatment: Take a stick whose length is two cubits, and whose breadth is four digits, and whose thickness is removed according to the curve of the breastbone in this way.
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And then place a round cloth over the head so that the stick does not hit the patient.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And then the stick is placed below the breastbone, and the hand or arm is extended over the stick between the parts below, and the stick is tied over the buttock and the arm and the end of the hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	Then the arm is placed on a ladder according to its breadth, and the hand is extended to the parts below, and the other side is suspended from the other side so that the joint will quickly come into alignment.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the instrument of it is completed according to any manner that you are able, then cover that which you have placed below the breastbone with a woolen cloth of equal quantity; and then place plaster prepared from ground black pepper and egg white over all the muscle, also rolled up above, and then tightly tie down the breastbone with a tight bandage; and let the ligament be rolled over the plaster, and the hand of it be attached to his neck, and let him be left, and may his hand not be hurt for four days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And see that the food of the patient is light while the member is being eased, for that is better for his healing.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And then let food be given more often seven or eight times and exercise be taken; and therefore if it is stiff and not soft, then it has been healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	But if the joint is dislocated many times due to moisture that happens to it or due to another cause, then let three cauterizations be administered in it, according to what was said before in the chapter on cauterization.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if all this is done and then seven days later the ligament is loosened and the joint is not closed up, and the plaster and bandage are removed from it several times, and it is not closed up and cats cannot be lifted to the parts above by it, then know that its nerves, which are at the head of the muscle, are cut or stretched out or made soft, and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	The reduction of that which is dislocated from the foot and breast or the parts behind is made by pushing and extending with hands while returning it to its place.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And let the other bandage be administered in it, and cure that until it is healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if healing becomes heavy in the member and delay in its movement happens, then let the patient take baths many times until that heaviness is relieved and he returns to his first nature.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter .XXVII.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	On the curing of dislocation of the neck.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	Know that the joint of the neck is dislocated with difficulty and returns to its place with difficulty; and it is dislocated to all parts, and most to the front part and behind, and its dislocation is not hidden from you because when you adjust the neck dislocated with its head, that is clearly stated to you, for the joint is hollowed out and cannot bend the arm or touch with it his own muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And see that you reduce the dislocation before it comes to him with an aposteme cauterized, because if it comes to him with an aposteme cauterized, its reduction is difficult and he will not be healed from it entirely; and especially when it is to the back parts, for it is worse than all other kinds of dislocations, and causes more pain, and often brings about death.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And its restoration, when it is possible to reduce it, is for the hand of him to be extended with two hands, and his arm expanded, and the hands of the doctor being on the neck and underneath him, and he pushing the joint with his fingernails or with the edge of his palm while returning it to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	But if the dislocation is to the front parts, then he returns so that he bends his hand with his own hand, while cutting the neck with the edge of his palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not obey reduction, then administer violent extension and very strong pressure.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And it is that two ministers expand the arm, and hold that joint so that it is not bent due to extension.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	And then let the arm be rolled over all parts, more than it is wrapped in a folded cloth on the hand of him, or a ligament.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, anoint it with some oil so that it is not caused by any causes which help in the lubrication of the joint with ease; and then push the joint with violent pushing while returning it to its place.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	And then its reduction let it be placed on that plaster in which it is tightened and dried with egg white, and let it be loosened with a decent bandage, and the arm be suspended from his neck and let him be left for some days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And then let it be loosened; and therefore if the joint is formed in its place, then you loosen his ligament and leave that.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see the joint not be strong, then you iterate the plaster and the ligament, and leave that for some days until it is loosened; and then loosen that.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	But if it happens to him heaviness due to the reduction of the joint and its disposition is in movement, then administer moistening in a bath and subtle friction, and compression while being loosened; or place over the joint aleliati, which is the oil of the fat of a lamb; and then let it be bound and leave that on the bone for the day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And then you wash that and put him in a bath; and when he is warm, then you rub the joint with temperate friction, and then iterate over that aleliati which is the oil of rosemary, once daily for three days.
corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denolam intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	Corruption has already occurred in the brain's interior instrument due to the bath, for it is limited.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you wish, place over that the udder of a cow which is moist and warm with butter and strewn over it; and do that several times, for it is moist and returns to its disposition.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter .XXVIII.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	On the curing of dislocation of malaccen, which is of the joint that is between the arm and the hand.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	Malaccen of the hand some times is dislocated, and the reduction of its dislocation is easier, and the contrary is of other joints; however if there is swiftness in its reduction in the hour that it is dislocated, before the place becomes aposteme cauterized or that an aposteme occurs in it.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the reduction of its dislocation is that you place the joint of the hand of the patient on a table and the minister expands his hand, and the doctor places his hand or the palm of his hand over the imminence of the joint, and push it while returning to its place.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	However if it is considered that the palm is already directed to the belly of the hand, then let the patient place both of his hands on a table due to extension and reduction; and if the dislocation comes before the two hands, then let the position of his hand be intrinsecally over the table so that the hand of the doctor may lean over that imminence of the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And if he returns to normal immediately, that is good; and if not, then strengthen that area with a plaster, and let the blister remain; and do not repeat this, for otherwise you will not be able to endure the reduction of it, and more days will pass.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	But examine the joint according to its tortuosity; and do not tell the patient any cause, unless your hand is made soft and you cannot strengthen it; then know that the nerves are cut or torn, and in this case there is nothing wrong with him except that he must be strengthened by cautery near his wound, and he should be made strong in this regard.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	Therefore when the patient is returned, then apply to him the plaster which we have recommended, and let it remain and be strengthened for several days; and then let it be loose and let it remain, and let his hand be exercised.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	But if his movement is impeded and some gravity occurs in him, then loosen that area with water and some rubbing several times, until he is eased.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	Of the cure of dislocation of the fingers.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Sometimes the fingers are dislocated entirely.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when any of these fingers is dislocated towards the second or third part of the palm, then you should press and push back the dislocation with your thumbs until it returns to normal.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	Then support the head of the finger, and suspend that part towards which it is dislocated, and let it be for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	And then suspend and extend that within the day until it is straightened out.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when night comes, then ligature that according to the narration, and do not stop loosening it during the day or exercising it by moving it, and let it be thus for several days until it is straightened out.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And do this also if it is dislocated towards the palm of the hand; and ligature that part and do your first operation on it, until it is healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And similarly, you should do with the others dislocations.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter 30.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	Of the cure of dislocation of the vertebrae of the back.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When complete dislocation occurs on any of the vertebrae of the back or neck and many vertebrae are removed from their places, then in this there is no cure, because death comes to the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	And the sign of this is that the excretion of the patient is outside his will, and he cannot retain it; and many times some of his members or both of his legs or both of his arms are made soft, or one of these; or a vertebra is displaced from its place, because many times it is displaced and the displacement of these is to four places.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Therefore, when it is displaced to the back parts, it is called hunchbackedness.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	But its cure is that then you should consider whether the hunchbackedness occurs from childhood, because then there is no cure for it and it has no complete healing at all.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	But in that which comes from accident or concussion or similar to these, the Ancients have said their ways of cure with prolix speech, of which the most returns with profit; but I have already abridged and abbreviated that for the benefit of my hearer because of my proximity to my understanding and by which I have explained it and demonstrated it with diverse instruments.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And I say that in hunchbackedness which occurs from the front part of the feet, there is no healing for it; and similarly in that which is done on two sides.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And those are not healed except that which occurs properly in the back by what I have related.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And let the patient be extended on his face over a pillow so that his feet are not elevated.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And then a straight staff is placed, fixed in the ground at the end of the pillow around the head of him; and another staff is placed in the ground under his feet at the other end of the pillow.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	And the minister should hold the staff, and it should not be fixed in a hole; and another minister should hold the other according to that form.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then a bandage is wrapped around the head of the patient and under it the tongue of the lion is pressed tightly; and extend the end of the tongue to the staff which is under the head of him, and let that be in him; and then tighten the other bandage over his buttocks by his fingers, and let them be under his legs; and then adjust all the bandages and let them be in the other staff which is under his feet.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And then each minister should extend the bandage to the end of the staff, and let the two staffs not be displaced from their places in which they are fixed, but rather not be fixed as we have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the doctor should place his palms on the vertebra with strength until it returns to normal, or let him lie on a table, and then let him adjust his feet on the table until he returns to normal.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	But if it does not return in this way, then take a table of which the breadth or length is three yards long, and hollow out in the wall from which we have said it is near the patient a place into which extends the end of the table.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And then let the middle of the table be placed over the vertebra; and the doctor should place his feet on the other end, and stretch tightly until the vertebra is contracted and returns to its place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you want to, open with a windlass which is turned by hand; and let there be fixed in the ground two staffs of one yard long, of which the length between each staff is one palm, and there is made in each staff a hole in which the windlass turns; and each staff is fixed in the ground so that it is not displaced.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And there shall be a round staff in which is the windlass, and let it be turned in the two holes of the two staffs.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at its end there is a hole in which the staff is formed, the length of which is one palm as it turns; and similarly in the other two staffs.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then tighten the bandages which you have tightened on the feet of the patient in the windlass which is under his head; and tighten the bandages which you have tightened on his buttocks in the turning which is under his feet.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And then each turn and let a minister twist the turn by hand; and the doctor smoothens the vertebra as we have said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is the form of the windlass:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And when the vertebra has returned to normal and the place is smoothed out, then let there be put over it a plaster made of white vinegar; and then let there be stopped with cloth; and then let him lie on the table of which the breadth is three yards or around that, and the length of it is the quantity which takes up the hunchbackedness, and over the place of the vertebra.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And then let him be bound with the bandage we have said, and the patient be given subtle food until he is healed.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if some swelling remains in the place at the end of the healing, then let there be administered medicines which moisten and lubricate by administration of the table for a long time, which we have related; and in that place lead sheet has been administered.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And sometimes they will suffer from an imminence in the lower part of the spine, and it is considered to be due to that dislocation; and it is this bone which is affected by this medicine, and therefore you must not apply it again, as this could lead to their death very quickly.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	On the treatment of a dislocated hip.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	Know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscles are not intended for dislocation alone, but only occur in those which occur in other joints with slight displacement and concavity.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the joint of the hip is dislocated in four ways: it is dislocated internally or externally, or it can be dislocated forward or backward.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And it is mostly dislocated internally, and rarely dislocated forward or backward.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	And a sign of its dislocation to the front is that when you straighten the patient's leg, it will be longer and more prominent than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend their foot backwards, and there will be an apostemata around the hip joint from the cautery, indicating that the head of the hip joint has moved here.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	And the sign of which one it occurs to the back is that its accidents are contrary to those listed above.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	And the sign that it occurs to the front is that they straighten their leg according to the compliment, but still cannot bend that foot due to pain; and if they try to walk on tiptoe, they cannot; and their urine is retained and they have apostemata around the joint, and they walk on their heels.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	And the sign that it occurs to the back is that they cannot straighten their leg or bend it forward due to pain; and their leg is shorter than the other, and the joint is softened, and the head of the hip joint has moved backward.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	But the reduction of this dislocation is that you should consider whether it is old and ancient, having been like that for a long time, that it will not be healed by simply reducing it and setting it in place; therefore, no medicine should be applied to it.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	But for the one in which it is recent, and it is one of the four types of dislocation, then you should move the joint and extend it to the front and back, and from the right to the left, as this will quickly return and not require any further treatment.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	But if it does not return in this way, then you should prepare to pull and extend the leg from the lowest part, either with their own hands or with a strap placed over the leg above the joint; and another person should hold the top of the leg below the patient's fingers while pulling upward, and another should press the lion-like strap against the root of the hip.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And it is an extension from the front to the armpit, or from the back to the spine.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And they should both be extended in one movement while the patient is raised from the ground and their leg hangs down.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	And this type of extension applies to all four types.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	So if the dislocation returns as we have said, all is well; but if not, then it is necessary to use any means possible to achieve the cure.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the proper reduction of it when it is dislocated and the dislocation is to the front, the patient should lie on their back; then place the strap over the root of the hip at the point between the head of the hip joint and the part below the armpit; and another person extends the strap above the armpit to the highest point of the collarbone.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And another person should grab the patient's arms and press the hip joint strongly while another pulls outward violently, as this will return it to its proper place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this is the quickest cure by which that part is reduced more quickly than with other methods.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	But if you are not able to do this and cannot persuade them to use this method of cure for all parts, then at least tie both the patient's feet together with a strong strap, quickly, on their heels and toes.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And the length of each part should be four digits, and the leg with the dislocation should be extended more than the healthy one by two digits.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And the patient's leg with the dislocation should be suspended from a beam above their head, and they should be in the middle position; and its length from the ground should be two arm-lengths.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And you should order a strong young man to push down on the head of the hip joint while another suspends the patient by their leg; and the other young man pulls up on the hip with force, as this will quickly return it to its proper place.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	But in the proper reduction when it is dislocated to the back, the patient should lie on their back with their leg bent as we have recommended earlier, and the strap should be tightly pressed against the dislocated hip and their foot.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And two beams should be placed, one under each of the patient's feet, and the other under their head; and they should be adjusted so that a mat of dampened cloth is wrapped around the middle beam so that the patient will not be hurt by it being between their thighs, as otherwise the extension downward will be painful.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And each person should extend their part, and the doctor should press down on the joint with his hand to guide the reduction according to the art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	So if you obey this instruction, all will go well; but if not, then pay attention to the following instructions and act according to what we have said about it earlier.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	But the patient should lie on their back comfortably.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is to the front, then the leg should be extended slightly, and it is according to this narrative instruction that you press your right palm over the patient's armpit, and another person pulls upward on their foot while pressing downward on their shoulder; and with this extension, they will be pulled to the front toward the armpit.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	And if the dislocation is to the back, then it should not be extended downward, but it should be raised up from the ground and placed on a hard surface; and if the hip joint is dislocated to the front, as we have said about its placement over two surfaces, then it will be elevated on its side with its leg extended, and its head will be turned back toward its chest, and the straps will be extended according to what we have said earlier.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And it should receive compression with a board over the joint on which side the dislocation is located.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	So when the reduction is complete according to what you see — and the sign of the reduction of it is not hidden from you, and it extends its leg with both feet, and when you see its joints bent and the dislocation expanded while the patient makes excuses, then you will know that the part has returned — and then you adjust both sides and press down on the hip joint and extend it with a band so that the hip is not bent in either direction; and let the patient rest for three or four days.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	And then untie the bandage and the plaster, and bring one leg up to meet the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	Then, if you see those wounds healing naturally, then know that the dislocation is cured and let the patient leave.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any cause of softening, then return and bandage that, and stretch that according to your first stretching, and let that be for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	Then untie that, and let that delay walking for some days, until it is comforted.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter 32.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	Of the cure for a dislocation of the jaw.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The jaw is dislocated in three ways: it is dislocated at the forward parts, and at the inward parts, and at the lower parts to the backward parts; and at the forward parts it is not dislocated.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of its dislocation is that you command the patient to apply his jaw to his thigh; then you know that the jaw is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of all of its manners is that you force the patient to lie down straight, so that he extends his thigh, if he can over it; adhere your two hands to his face, and place his foot between your feet; and then adhere his jaw with your palms, and hold those between your fingers over his jaw with strength, and another extend his foot while the jaw returns to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And the sign of its reduction is that his thigh adheres to the thigh with an easy, non-laborious elevation.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Then bandage that and make the thigh adhere to the thigh, and then tie those together with a bandage for three or four days, and then untie those.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And let the patient not use walking for some days, until he is healed and comforted.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	But if the reduction of it to you is excused, then administer strong extension with bandages from which in the cure of the hip a preceding narrative was given.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter 33.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	Of the cure for a dislocation of the ankle.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The ankle is sometimes dislocated by a small removal, and sometimes it is dislocated according to the complement; and its dislocation is made either at the inward parts or at the outward parts.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the sign of its dislocation is that you see the ankle swollen proceeding to the part to which it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	But the cure for the removal of it is a gentle reduction, and that it be extended with ease with the hands and be poulticed until it returns.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	But in the cure of it when it is dislocated according to the complement, you see that the patient lies down straight, and that he holds a strong and valiant minister of the part behind his back at the middle place of him.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	And then you with your right hand hold the highest foot, and with your left hand of the lower part of the foot at the place of the ankle.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	And then pull the foot to you with your right hand, and then with the left twice, and then extend it with the left; and press the foot of the leg with the right over the thigh six times.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And do that two times according to what we have counted.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And then press the foot of the leg to the thigh the third time, and you are at the ankle.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	So if it returns in one time or two according to this manner, and if you see the foot swollen, that is good; and if not, then repeat the operation on him, for he will return.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	But if to you is prohibited the reduction of it with that which we have recommended, then let the patient lie on his back on the ground, and stretch a rope tightly in the ground, and that cord between his thighs, and you already have wrapped a cloth over him so that he does not slide.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	And then let the minister of it hold his thighs, and then another minister extend the foot with their hands or with bandages that lie over the nape of the neck; and then extend each minister against the extension of his pair, and let the cord be extended between the thighs of him holding that, so that the body of him is not drawn to the lower parts beyond its extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And then let the doctor poultice the dislocation with their hands, and another minister hold the healthy thigh at the lower parts, for the dislocation returns with ease.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And so when the dislocation returns and is declared to you the health of the reduction of it, then pause bandage and stretch that with strong bandages, and tie the leg to the ankle.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And see that you are wary or guard the nerves which are behind over the ankle, lest the bandage over it be violent and lead that strongly.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	And then let that be for two days or three; and if the bandage is softened, stretch that.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	And then untie that on the third day or the fourth, and let the patient not walk for 40 days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	But if he is forced to walk before that space, it is not made certain that the dislocation is not dissolved and ruined, and then let that not receive a cure.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if pus occurs to him, then let you minister to him in the healing of it that which in our preceding narrative we spoke of, in another place of cure and of poulticing, until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter 34.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	Of the cure for a dislocation of the toes of the feet.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	Let that which is dislocated be swollen with little extension six times; and that which is difficult, let it be gentle.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	But if the dislocation is in some knuckles of the nape of the neck, then let the patient lie his foot on the ground or on a table, and be standing like that as if he was walking.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	And then you stand on your feet and place your foot over that which protrudes from the joints, and then press it with your foot with strength while it returns, and see that it is swollen and does not protrude at the place.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	And then place under the nape of his neck a table which covers all the foot, to which are two caps, and then stretch that with decent and firm extension for three days; and then untie that and let him rest from walking for several days, until it is stretched out and its reduction is assured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	Of the species of dislocation that are made with sprain or with fracture or with whatever.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When any cause of those happens to you and you persevere in the cure of it and in its restoration, many times you will succeed death.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And therefore let not that you presume upon the cure of it, but that which is wise in the art, of long experience, merciful and compassionate, tardy, not impatient nor presumptuous; and use in the beginning of medicines that yield pus cauterizations only, and let the patient be at divine judgment, unless to which you hope salvation from perdition, with the alleviation of wickedness, and in which appears some hope.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And therefore strive you as soon as possible to reduce it at the beginning of the cause, before he develops pus cauterization.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And then if the member returns according as you will, then minister medicine that yields pus cauterization and cures the sprain with that which is convenient for it of the swollen joints.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	If there is a dislocation with a fracture and bleeding in the bones of the joints, then you pierce their veins and do to them what we have said about simple diseases that precede those diseases in those locations.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And guard and avoid according to your ability that instrument in the ways of fear according to what has been preceded by my preaching; for it is better for you to give praise to your Creator, and more permanent for your glory, and healthier for your true body those things in your time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Thus ends the words of Albucasim perfectly, of which God be blessed.
Amen.	Amen.
