Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Thus begin the words of Albucasis.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	O sons, since I have fulfilled this book for you, which is the end of the science of medicine, by whose completion in it its end has come to be, and through whose expositions and declarations, it is apparent to me that you will complete that which concerns you with this treatise, which is a part of the operation by hand, so it is surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	Because the operation by hand is spread throughout our realm and in our time deprived of all, while the science of it greatly perishes, its visions are obscured, and nothing remains of it except a few small descriptions in the books of the ancients, which alter most things and lead to those errors and hesitations that are hidden within their minds, and the strength of the art is prolonged.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And it appears to me that you will enliven that through the arrangement of this treatise in accordance with the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and so that the forms of the tools of cautery and other instruments of the work come through addition of the declaration, and through preparation of them, which cause is necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	But the cause for which no good artist is attained by his hand in our time is that the art of medicine is long, and that its performer must be exercised in the science of anatomy, which knows the parts of members and their forms, and the conjunction and separation of them; and has the knowledge of bones, nerves, and sinews, and the number of those, and their exit; and of the pulsating veins and the quiet ones, and the places of their issuing.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And because of that Hypocras says that by name is much, but in the work little, and especially in the art of the hand.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	But we have already said that in the introduction of this book; for whoever is not learned in what we have said about anatomy is not evacuated so that he does not fall into error by which men will die, as I have seen many of those, for some are formed in this science and throw themselves from it without knowledge or experience.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	For I saw a foolish and experienced doctor open an abscess of scrofula on the neck of a woman, and cut some arteries of the neck so that much blood flowed, and the woman died under his hands.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And I saw another doctor who, when he was called, pulled out a stone from a man who had a process in his state, and the stone was great, and he came to him and took out that stone with a piece of the bladder, and that man died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And I called upon extracting that one, and I saw that because of the size of the stone and the disposition of the patient I knew he would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And I saw another doctor who took stipends from a duke of our land for surgery, and thus he did on a black slave whose leg was fractured; and prepared by his ignorance, extracted the fracture over the wound with powders and splinters with strong compression, and did not allow the wound breath.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And he bandaged it according to his desires, and he lay for several days and commanded that I loosen the bandage, and so he was for many days and commanded that I loosen the bandage; and he stayed like this until the thigh and leg were apostemated, and came to perdition.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And I was called to him, and I prepared to loosen the bandage, and there was tranquillity and relief from his pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	But indeed the corruption was confirmed in the member, so that I could not restrain it and the corruption did not cease to wander in the member until the patient perished.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And I saw another doctor who perforated a cancerous abscess, and it was ulcerated for several days, until the malignancy of it grew great with its lord.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The which cause is that the old cautery is pure of melancholic humor, and it does not come to it from iron in any way, but that it be in a member who suffers so that it comes from all.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And because of that, sons, it is necessary for you that the operation by hand be devised in two ways: so is in operation to him who is associated with health, and in work to whom it is perilous in the greatest dispositions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And I have already exhorted that in every place of this book where there is an operation in which error and fear come; so that it is necessary for you to guard that and leave that, so that the foolish do not find a way to speak and discourage you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And thus take your weapons with solicitude and with protection of God, and your patients with facility and firmness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the better way through the grace of God that they may go to health and glorious success, and lay those terrible diseases of difficult cure, and display your weapons from that which makes you fear, so that solicitude in your faith and in your name does not abandon you: for it remains to your glory, and beyond in the world to your sanctities.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Gaulish already said in some of her warnings:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	Do not heal wicked illnesses, so that wicked doctors are not named.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And I have devised this book according to three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Begins the division of the book, and first of the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter ordered from the head into feet, in the forms of the instruments and the tools of cauteries, and what is necessary in the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter, of bleeding and piercing, and of cupping, and of wounds, and of extraction of thorns and similar things, all capitoloized and ordered in the forms of the instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	Division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, of restoration and dislocation, and of cure of torture and of similar things; capitoloized from the head into feet, and of the forms of the instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	Of cautery with fire and acute medicine and remembrance of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	With that begins the treatise of all the book.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	That I may tell you the quality of the elements of that cautery and of its pains, and in which complexions cautery is prohibited.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Then I say that the word of the quality of the element of cautery and of its pain is long and prolix, and subtle through science, and secret hidden; and many wise have spoken much about it, and they have been disagreed about it, and for me a little of their words is enough, fearing prolixity.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And thus I say that cautery confers universally on all complexions which are by matter or by its matter, excepting two complexions, which are cold complexions.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the cold and dry complexions by matter, they are disagreed; for some say that cautery is beneficial to it, and others say the contrary of that, that cautery is not convenient in an illness which is by quality and dryness, for fire's nature is quality and dryness, and it is convenient that an illness be cured when cold and dry.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And he says the contrary of that, that cautery is done benefit in all illnesses cold and dry which we see in the bodies of men, for when you compare the body of man and its moisture to the complexions of fire, you rub the body of man dry.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I say through his word that experiment that one has already seen me several times to be discovered.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	However, we do not believe that anyone should come to this who is not experienced and practiced in the chapter of cauteries by recent exercises, and has known the diversity of complexions of men and the disposition of diseases in their bodies, and the causes of those, and their accidents, and the space of time of those.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	But in other complexions, there is no fear over them, especially in cold and moist diseases; for all doctors have agreed on those, and are not disagreed on using cauteries on them.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And know, children, that the secret of healing by cautery with fire and of its goodness is that cauteries with medicine that burns are when fire is simple, whose action does not reach except to the member which is cauterized and does not affect another member adjusted to it except with a small injury.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	But the action of medicine that burns reaches to those members from which it is distant; and it makes difficult healing come strongly in the member with disease, and strongly it drives it out.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	But fire, through its sublimity and the goodness of its substance, does not do that except to make superfluous; And it is known to us by experience and by longevity of service of study on the truth of causes; And because of this I am excused from the length of speech. And if it were not that I was not read in my free time in this pause with you, a secret hidden with fire, and the quality of the operation of it in bodies and its expulsion by which diseases are expelled, with philosophical speech demonstrated, which would be acute in your ears.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And know, children, that they disagree on the time when it is convenient to do cauteries, and they pause the best time in spring.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And I say that cauteries are convenient in all times, because the harm by the accidental time is submerged in the benefit of what is drawn by cautery, and especially if the cautery is for pain or of necessary pains, strong and fiery, which do not suffer delay so that evil comes from them, which is greater than a little harm coming through time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And therefore do not fear in your ears, o children, that which is not judged except by the common people and foolish doctors; It is that to that disease which is healed by cautery there is no reduction of time at all, and they pause on the consequence of it.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the cause is not as they think it is, because cautery is only in place of medicine which alters the complexion and dries up the humidities which are the cause that pain comes.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	But cauteries are superfluous over medicine by willfulness of their strength and power of their operation, and greatness of their Lord.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	And it is possible that his disease will return at some time, according to the complexion of the patient and the location of his disease, and its power, and what is prepared in his body by the accumulation of superfluities in him, and what comes to him in his acquisition in foods and like those causes; But that disease in which cautery is administered is a subtle disease in a member with few superfluities and humidities, as well as cauterization of a tooth for pain and likeness to that, it is possible that the same pain will not return in him, but this happens little.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	And popular speech is that cautery is the last remedy of medicine; And it is a true saying, not that they understand in it, because they think that there is no healing that benefits from medicine or anything else besides cautery.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the cause is contrary to that; And the intention that cautery is the last remedy of medicine is only when we administer the methods of healing in some diseases, and those medicines do not confer it, and especially at the end of the cause we administer cautery to them, and it benefits that.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And from here we see that cautery is not the last remedy of medicine according to the intention which the vulgar and foolish doctors understand it.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And the ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they did not say that except for the equality of gold and sublimity of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they said that the place of cautery does not make brawn, although that is not absolutely true, because I have seen that it only happens in some bodies and not in others; And cauterization with that is good and better than with iron as they say; But when you do cauterize with fire with gold, it is not declared to you, because it is ignited according to the quantity that you want for the rust of gold, and because it prepares to receive friction; And if you adjust it on fire, some leaves are heated so that the gold-smith can pick them up with the occupation of that.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And because of this, cauterization with iron is done to us more lightly and closer to rectitude of operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have ordered this chapter on cautery according to chapters, and I have ordered those of the head into the feet, so that they ask me what they want from it.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	Of cauterization for headache caused by coldness and moisture.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cauterization confers with humidity and coldness on the servant accident of which there are two causes; It is a cause of soda and multitude of fluxes, called rhachitis, from the parts of the ears and the nostrils flowing, and multitude of sleeping, and pain in teeth, and of the golaryro, and universally of all disease that comes through friction, as well as paralysis, stroke, and like in those diseases.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cauterization is this: that first you command the patient to be evacuated by laxative medicine for three or four days, according to the strength of the patient and his age and habit.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then command that he should shave his head with a razor, and then make him lie between your knees on a low bench, and let him rest his feet on your lap.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then pause the edge of your palm above his nose between his eyes.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	But however, when the place of your middle finger is reached, sign that place with your thumb, and then ignite the cautery olive, of which this is the form:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And then pause that over the place marked with your thumb, in such a way that it descends, and while your hand is pressed little by little, you revolve that.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And then lift your hand lightly and look at the place, and if you see some quantity of the head removed, as well as the quantity of hair, then lift your hand again, and if it does not return with that iron, with another, if it is chilled, while that is seen by the eye what I have said to you.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then take a little salt and dissolve it over the place and let him lick that for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then pause upon it the cloth soaked in vinegar and let it lie on it while the ash of the fire is destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And then heal the place with tetrapharmacon unguent while it is healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And they said that when the Roman plaster is open, as many meals are poured onto the brawn, because it is better and more beneficial.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And they said that the tendon should be cauterized within the bone, and the cautery should be held within it while some part of the nature of the bone is burned.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And then it should be wiped with that which is astringent to the bone, and then healed.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	Others say that with the cautery it reached the bone, as the strong pressure on the bone made the bone break, and this is the form of small aphecata.
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And they believe that from that location the vapor from the head expires.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And if the ulcer has been open for a long time, it should be treated until it is healed and consolidated.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	But I have not seen these two types of cautery at all, except in a few cases out of fear; and for me, it is better that he be saved, if possible, because the head is devastated by the solution of continuity as we have testified in other members, especially when the patient's head is of a frail nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the first type of cautery is safer and better for me, and I use it both ways to save lives.
Capitol segon.	Chapter two:
Del cauteri del cap.	Of cauterization of the head:
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When in all the head occurs a chronic and long-lasting pain and this is prolonged in the patient, and he uses garlic and leeches and scabies and plasters and poultices and bandages and hot stones and similar things, especially if he has already been cauterized with a cautery but none of those remedies benefit him, then consider that if the patient's head is of a strong creation in its nature, and not frail, and you find a great deal of coldness there, then cauterize it again with another cautery beneath that one a little.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	Then cauterize the top of his head with a cautery until the scalp is split open.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	The scalp split open and the quantity we have recounted discovered and cauterized with a cautery in the back of the head in the place which is called a vessel — and it is that place in which the ventouse is stopped.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And press your hand there and do not discover the bone, because through this the patient feels great pain unlike all other cauterizations of the head.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And I say this cautery in its place, because the cautery with which you cauterize the horns of the head and the occiput is a more subtle cautery than that with which the middle of the head is cauterized; and this is the form of it:
Capitol ters.	Chapter three:
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	Of the cauterization of not antique emigration:
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When a strong pain in the front of the head or a pain extending to the eye, the head should be evacuated with medicated cleansing agents, and the other cure should be administered, which I have described in the diseases of the head; and if all fails, cauterization is done in two ways: either cauterization with an acute burning medicine, or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	But cauterization with a burning medicine is to take a piece of charcoal, and to scorch it and put the ends of it on both sides of the head.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	Then cut the site of the pain in the temple with a sharp-pointed lance until it is done underneath the scalp, so that it is hidden.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	And then press on it with a descent constriction, and let it remain there for three hours; and then remove the charcoal and treat the wound with cotton soaked in wine or vinegar until the location turns purple.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then heal that with ointment once it is healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you want to do this with some burning medicines which I have written about in the two treaties on burning medicines:
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	But the cauterization with iron according to this manner: heat the cautery of which this is the form:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	and it is called a peg-like nail, because the head of it is like the form of a peg with some curvature, and in the middle of it is a small protuberance.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	Then rest your hand on the site of the pain — so that the nail is not burned underneath — and rotate the iron little by little with speed.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the amount of it that is burned by the thickness of the scalp as far as the size of the nail, and raise your hand so that the artery underneath is not burned, so that no flow of blood comes.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then moisten cotton in salt water and place that on the site, and let it remain for three days; and then place cotton moistened with wine, and heal with ointment once it is healed.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you want to cauterize with the tip of the scalpel according to cautery, and beware of cutting the artery in this not-ancient emigration:
Capitol quart.	Chapter four:
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	Of the cauterization of antique emigration:
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you cure emigration with what we have said about the preceding cure, and what we have said in the divisions of diseases, and the cure does not benefit, and you see that the disease which does not suffice it is what we have said about the first cautery with medicine or the cautery with fire, then where you ignite the cautery-scalpel until it turns white, then indicate on the site of the pain with a line the length of which is the size of your finger, or however much; and having pressed your hand there for an outlet and strengthened that there, pierce the artery within and enter into the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, it is necessary for you to guard against the continuance of the mandible, which is damaged by chewing, and that the joint not be burned and the nerve which controls that, and that no spasm ensue.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it is about the custody and care of the flow of blood from the artery which has burst, because there is danger in the burst of it, especially to him who ignores what he does and is not skilled and experienced; let the operation be done at the beginning.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And I will come with a reminder of the regimen for accidental blood flow from an artery according to its own manner in your free book.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see that this disease does not suffice this cautery and the body of the patient tolerates it, cauterize in the middle of the head as we have recounted, and heal the wound once it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you want to administer the cautery which we have said in the chapter on stretching of an artery with cautery having two edges, it is better and more appropriate cauterization.
Capitol .v.	Chapter five:
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	Of the cauterization of the pains of ears.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When in the ear there is pain from cold and it is cured by lactic causes and with the other cure which we have said in the division, and the pain does not cease, then ignite the cautery, and this is the one which has the name puncta, of which this is the form:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	Then pierce it with the point and let it be guided around all of the ear as it is rotated, or in the circuit of whichever one if the pain is in either one.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Lengthen you with the cautery of the root of the ear little by little so that it tests the place with feeling.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the cautery of ten points in all the ear, and which one, then heal the sites once they are healed.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter six:
De cauterizacio de turtura.	Of the cauterization of torture:
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	Torture which is cured and cauterized with spices which come from phlegm, according to what we have said in the divisions of diseases.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cauterization with the species which comes from dryness or by spasm of the nerve.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you cure that species of torture with herbs and poultices and compresses, and your cure does not confer, then where you cauterize the patient with three cauteries: the first pierces the root of the ear, the second a small one underneath the temple, and the third pierces the junction of two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And apply your cautery to the opposite side of the sick person, because softness does not appear except on the side where there is an appearance of healing.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	And the way of cauterizing is that you cauterize with the cautery on the right side of the upper part of the ear, and in the temple another, the length of which is according to the length of the finger toe, and place your hand holding the cautery until half the thickness of the hair has been burned.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the form of the cautery, and it is a special instrument of the surgeon, the form of which is shown in front of the table.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	However, more subtle is that one a little like this; and cover what is in it of superfluous thickness a little.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	Then treat the area with what is before it has been processed until it is healed.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter .vii.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	Of cauterization of ancient apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is old and you treat it with what we have said, and your medication does not work, and the patient does not have a fever, then cauterize him with four cauteries: on all the horns of his head; and with cautery in the middle of his head, as we have said; and cauterize him in the neck.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the manner of cautery is done according to what has been said above.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And it has already been cauterized over the mouth of the stomach; and it is more behind; and let it be cured with what processes.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter .viii.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	Of cauterization of oblivion made by flame.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	Let large jars and pills be given to the patient in the beginning by the servant who cleanses them.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	Then scrape all of the patient's head and place on his neck a poultice of cedar described in the treatise on poultices.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And apply it several times, for that is the way of cautery.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And do that according to what medicine orders which we have already said.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And if he heals well by those, and if not, then do to him three cauteries in the back part of his head, which descend from the highest part of his head into the lowest part of his neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And place between each cautery the thickness of a finger, and treat the cautery with what has been said.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	But if you want to increase it and the patient can tolerate it, then do cautery in the middle of his head; and if you see greater increase, then cauterize him on both horns.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Then treat that until it is healed; and let the cautery be olive-colored according to the form given before.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter .ix.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	Of cauterization of paralysis and of softening of all the body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	Let the servant cleanse his head by jars and what we have said; and scrape the patient's head, then cauterize him with cautery in the middle of his head, and with cautery on all the horns of his head, and with cautery on the back part of him, and with three cauteries on the vertebrae of his neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the softening of the body's paralysis that he tolerates and the illness is strong, then cauterize him with four cauteries on the vertebrae of his back, and finally with cautery until half the thickness of the hair has been burned, and raise your hand.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	Then treat that until it is healed, and let that be an olive-colored cautery.
Capitol .x.	Chapter .x.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	Of cauterization of epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	The epileptic is not cauterized unless the epilepsy is due to phlegm.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And so let the servant cleanse his brain with herbs and with the other treatment which we have said in the division when the patient is large and tolerates the exception of medicines.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if the patient is a child who does not endure medicines, then let the servant administer to him healing drinks and masticators, before meals, with good food.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	Then scrape the patient's head, and then cauterize him with one cautery in the middle of his head according to the preceding manner, and with another cautery on the back of his head, and cauterize on each horn of his head.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is strong and tolerates it, then cauterize him with cauteries which I have said, having paralysis and softening of the body on the vertebrae of the neck and the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And let it be an olive-colored cautery according to what is preceded.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	But if the patient is a child, then apply a subtle cautery according to this manner.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter .xi.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	Of cauterization of melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humidities and thick phlegm, then cauterize him with the cauteries which we have said in having paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is excess phlegm declining into melancholy, and the patient' body is cold, then let him drink what cleanses his brain according to what has preceded in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	Then scrape the patient's head, and then make a decently twisted bandage of it over the circle, and place that on the middle of his head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And let the patient be in a sweat, and let him be held in every part.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	Then apply a liniment; and it is more worthy of an old ram of sheep.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And let that be heated over the fire with moderate heat, which he endures when it is within him.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	Then apply that in the middle of his head on the circle, and let him be within until he is deflated.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And do that to him once every week, with his other regimen well within until he is healed; or if you wish, cauterize him making small points according to his temperature, but have your hand on a cautery otherwise ordered: this is a special cautery which moistens the brain equally.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	Then apply that cloth wrapped in wool or in flannel of wool.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter .xii.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	Of cauterization of water descending into the wound.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When you have declared the beginning of water in the wound by the signs which we have said in the division, then begin and give to drink what cleanses his head, and guard it from all humidities.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And let that boil in water in a pot for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	Then command him to wash his head, and cauterize him with cautery in the middle of his head; and cauterize him with two cauteries on two temples if there is the beginning of water in two wounds, or on one side if there is the beginning of water in a wound.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Enter with cautery all the veins and vessels which are beneath the skin; and let the cauteries be as long in length as the temples are wide.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	Guard against blood flow when he is cauterized; and if you see from him blood flow, or stop it with some medicine, which is to you possible.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And come to know by experience which is in extraction of vessels and with incision of those, and guard against flow of blood.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And some vessels are cauterized beneath the bones at two cauteries produced by the end.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter .xiii.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	Of cauterization of ancient tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When tears from the eyes are chronic and flow through the veins and arteries that are in the obvious place on the head and it is confirmed that this is caused by excessive phlegmatic humors, then cauterize with a cautery the one which we mentioned in the chapter on water entering the eyes, and with a cautery in the middle of the head and with two cauteries below the temples, and with two cauteries below the bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if there is a need for more cautery, then cauterize all around the eye socket above the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter 14
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	On cauterization for nose bleeds.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you treat someone with what we have said in the division and your treatment does not help, then prepare and give the patient enemas for three nights; then shave his head and cauterize the middle of his head with a small cautery made from olive oil.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	Then cauterize the top of the nose with two cauteries above the eyebrows under the hair, a little one.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And be careful with the cautery so that you do not burn the area.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	This is the form of the cautery made from cloves.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	On cauterization for softening the eyelids of the eyes.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the eye is softened due to illness or humidity, then cauterize that eyelid with a cautery made from this lunar cautery; and this is its form:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you, cauterize that above the two eyebrows a little with two cauteries all around, and let them be extended from the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And let the length of each cautery be according to the size of the eyebrow.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery, but according to the amount that the upper part of the eyelid is adhered.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter 16
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	On cauterization for the eyelid of the eye when hairs turn to the inside and poke the eye.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the hairs of the eye turn inside and poke the eye, there are two ways to treat it: either with a cautery made from fire or with a burning medicine.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If you treat it with fire cautery, order the patient to open his eyes so that you may cut off the hairs at their roots, while they are prolonged and curling; and if he pokes his eye, then you should compress his eye with a bandage so that it is not damaged until the hairs have grown back.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Then when they have grown back and curling, then place the patient's head in your lap, and apply a sign with ash on the eyelid of his eye with a sign, the shape of which is like that of a dead leaf; let the beginning of this sign be close to the hairs.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	Then place cotton soaked in white vinegar or in mullein tea on the eye.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And heat the cautery, of which this is the form:
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	Then cauterize over the figure which you have marked, little by little, in small spots, until the surface of the eyelid which is like that of a myrtle leaf is completely burnt and appears properly.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	And a sign of the health of your work is that you see the eyelid of the eye already contracted and the hairs of it elevated above the puncture of the eye.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And so elevate your hand and lay that for three days, and then place on it a poultice with a bandage until the scar is healed.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that with ointment until it is healed.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	But if the hairs return for any cause and the eyelid is softened again, then do the cautery over that area again as you did first.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	But if the hairs are under the eyelid, then cauterize that area so that it is elevated to its natural place and is curling and the hairs do not poke the eye.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	But the cautery with burning medicine is that you order the patient to open his eyes so that the hairs are prolonged and curling; and then let it be made of linen the shape of a myrtle leaf.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. .i., o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And then take of soap with aconite one ounce. [ missing text ] Take that and mix it with honey, and then make that into a poultice so that it is not too loose; and apply that on the linen which is made like a myrtle leaf, and place that on one eye or both eyes; and let the patient's head be in your lap.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And hold the end over the medicine and press that a little and do not harm him until the patient feels the biting of the medicine, for it bites like fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And when you perceive that it bites, then take away the medicine and moisten that with your finger; therefore when the biting ceases, then remove the medicine and wash the eye with water; and then consider if you see the eyelid already lifted as it is washed by fire or by incision, for then it is well; and if it returns to that of the medicine on the area where the medicine has not bitten and does not turn black until your operation is healed and the eye is contracted.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And then place on it a poultice with a bandage until the scar of the abrasion is healed, and then treat that with ointment made from defininicum or another one until it is healed.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary for you that after your operation to be careful with great diligence that in the eye does not fall any of the medicine; and if the eyelid after a few days becomes softened and for some reason the hairs poke the eye, then repeat your medicine over that area which of the eyelid became softened and just as you did at the beginning, and compress it until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is the shape of the myrtle leaf.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And know that the eyes of men are diversified according to their magnitude and smallness, therefore according to that is made your contraction.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And do not moisten the end of the wand in water for that person to whom it is taught in this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter 17
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	On cauterization for a fistula that is in the tear duct of the eye.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you treat a fistula with what we have said in the divisions of illnesses and your treatment does not help, then do that you cauterize that according to this way: order the patient to place his head in your lap, and let him hold his head by someone between his hands in such a way that it is not harmed or moved with his head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	Then place on the eye of him cotton soaked in white vinegar or in mullein tea.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And heat the cautery, of which this is its form:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	which shall be hollow, like a straw or a feather, from one end of which the cautery is made.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you see that it penetrates into the other end.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you want to be drawn out like a tent.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	But what is hollow is better for your work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And then press the fistula if it is open, and draw from it pus and dry that.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not open, then open it and extract the swelling of it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And then place on it the cautery that is well kindled, and hold your hand over the eye to prevent the patient from moving or the patient being disturbed, and then place the cautery on the grays of the eye and touch that.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And if at the beginning of your cautery you perceive that it has entered into the bone, that is good; and if not, then repeat the cautery one or two times, if necessary; and leave it like that for three days, and then place over that spot a poultice and surround it with a dried ointment until it is healed.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	But if eleven days have passed and it has not healed, then place over it a sharp, corrosive medicine until the bone is uncovered and is scraped according to what is convenient in its chapter.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And there is another way to do cauterization of a fistula, which they first said: enter into the location of the fistula and cover it; and then pause in that fissure a subtle caustic of which its form is made of. And pour into that the quantity of one ounce of molten lead; and hold your hand with the caustic with good retention, and do not harm the patient so that the molten lead does not reach the hole of that; and cover what you pause over the hole of the patient with a cloth soaked in vinegar or water, for the lead will adhere to the location of the fistula and heal it through marvelous healing.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about cauterization and treatment, that is good; and if not, then it is necessary to administer a nasal speculum and reduce the fistula into the cavity of the nose according to what will come in its proper place.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter 18.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	Of cauterization of the slit of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Many times, slits occur in the labia, and mostly in children's labia.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Therefore, when you heal those slits with what we have said in the divisions and your treatment does not benefit, then light the small knife cautery according to this form that is enclosed:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And let its cavity be according to the subtlety of the knife.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Then pause that gently in those slits until the cautery reaches the bottom of the slits.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And then heal that with bandages until it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter 19.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	Of cauterization of a fistula in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When in the root of the uvula or on the palate or on the roots of the teeth there is an ulcer and it becomes swollen, and then it is broken, and then it becomes old, and the ulcer and a fistula are made, and you heal that and your treatment does not benefit, then when you light the cautery according to the amount that is received in the fistula, and then put that lit iron into the hole of the fistula, and hold your hand so that the hot iron reaches the bottom of it, and do that one or two times; and then heal that with what we have said about treatment until it is healed.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And therefore, if the wound is healed and healed, that is good; and if not, then it is necessary to discover the place and remove the rotten bone according to what will come in its chapter.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	Of cauterization of teeth and of softening of the gums.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the gums are softened by humidity and the teeth are hurt, and you heal those with medicines and they do not help, then put the head of the patient in your lap, and then light the cautery, the form of which will come here soon, so that you place the quinin over the tooth and insert into that the lit cautery quickly, and hold your hand a little so that the patient feels the heat of the fire reaching the root of the tooth.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	And then lift up your hand, and then repeat the cautery several times according to what you want.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	And then the patient should rinse his mouth with salt water and hold it for an hour, and then spit it out, because the hurt tooth is hardened and the softened gum is tightened and the corrupted humidity is dried up.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	Of cauterization of toothache.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When toothache is from coldness, or in it is swollen or red, or the cure with medicine does not help, then cauterization in that is according to two ways: either cauterization with cow's bile, or cauterization with fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Cauterization with bile is that you take cow's bile and boil it in a iron pot, and then take the tip and wrap it in a piece of cloth, and then dip that tip in the boiled bile and place it quickly on the painful tooth so that it is made cold.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And then repeat that several times until the virtue of the fire reaches the root of the teeth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you wish, dip wool or cloth in the bile, and place that on the painful tooth, and hold the lit iron over that so that the iron reaches the bottom of the cavity of the tooth.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	But however, cauterization with fire is that you attend to the iron needle or wire, and let it have some thickness and the acuity of the fire not reach the mouth of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	And then light the cautery, and place that on the tooth and hold your hand so that the cautery is made cold; and do that several times because the pain is increased or in that day or the next day.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And let the patient fill his mouth with good bile and hold that for an hour, and then spit it out; and this is the form of the cautery.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And cauterize with what you want according to what is possible for you.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the form of the needle:
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	Of cauterization of hernia.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When hernia is of phlegm and cold humors and does not become hard with digestion by medicines, and you see the digestion of those lightly, then you light the cautery so that its form is as follows, having two tips so that it produces smoke from one tip while the cautery is lit from the other tip, and place that lit cautery on the hernia once, and if it does not help, do that again until it reaches the bottom of the hernia.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the hernia is small, then pause the cautery according to the quantity of the hernia, and let it be for three days and place a poultice over it soaked in bile so that what the fire has burnt is softened.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And then heal that with ointment and bandages and linen until it is healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And the form of the needle or should cautery be like this:
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter 23.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	Of cauterization of voice hoarseness and of ale constriction.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When humiditys come upon the bronchus of the lung, and especially when that is from coldness of complexions, then let the patient be evacuated at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize that by the root of the larynx in the place of spitting.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And be careful that you do not reach with the cautery to the larynx or burn the cords of it, but a little.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And cauterize that with another cautery by the junction of the neck at the last vertebra of it.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	And the cautery of it is like a nail, in the previous manner.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And then heal that with what is preceding until it is healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter 24.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	Of cauterization of sickness of the lung and of cough.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When cough and sickness of the lung are from cold humors and the patient does not have fever or typhus, and it is old sickness, then cauterize that with two cauteries on the breastbone at the places of spitting and with another cautery in the middle place of the chest between two nipples; and let the cautery be like a nail according to the previous form.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, make a small hole with the cautery called "punta", the shape of which is described in the section on ear pain.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And make a small cut in the skin and apply that which is mentioned earlier, so that it may heal.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	Now there are three types of cautery with this tool; you can do three cauteries according to this form:
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25:
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	Of the cautery of tics, which is the head of the helper.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the head of the assistant is displaced due to slippery humidity and does not return to its proper place in due time, and a slight movement causes it to be displaced, as we have witnessed, you must first reduce the displacement, and let the patient lean back on his back or on his side; then raise the tendon which lies within the tic at the upper part by the fingers of your left hand, if the joint is dislocated there.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And you must heat the cautery, which has two ends; and this is how it is done:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And cauterize the tendon so that it penetrates to the other side; and you will see the pattern of cautery from both ends.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And you must do this gently according to the amount of pain; and this is how it is done:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And sometimes they are adjusted according to this count, for that is why there are 8 cauteries.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And you must place on the cautery some powder, and let the patient relax, and the limb should not be moved for some time until it is comfortable.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the displacement is at the top and it is done, then you must cauterize the muscle with a nail-shaped cautery or with pointed cauteries, for the joint is confirmed, and the humidity is removed, and the patient is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26:
De cauterizacio del stomac.	Of the cautery of the stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When the stomach is filled with cold and moist humors that are extracted from its natural state and multiply there, and if you continue the methods of treatment and do not confer, then let the patient lie on his back, stretched out with his arms and legs, and cauterize him with three cauteries: one cautery below the feet according to the amount of a finger using a nail-shaped cautery; and two cauteries below the rib cage of the cautery so that the figure of the cautery is triangular; and lengthen between them so they are not close together, for they will cause burning.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cautery is two-thirds of the thickness of the tendon.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And the figure of the cautery is according to this addition, and if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and this should be a cautery according to the form of a circle according to this form:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And the stomach is cauterized with small holes according to that which the cautery fears: and you should feel on the stomach points according to the amount that you want with pain, and then cauterize those points with a cautery; and cure that with the cure that is mentioned so that it may heal.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27:
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	Of the cautery of the fried liver.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When the liver has pain from coldness or humidity or gross fullness and is driven out of its natural state by excessive outflow, and it is cured with what we have said, then let the patient lie on his side over his chest, and feel with pain three cauteries according to this form and this quantity placed on the liver below the hypochondria, where the man lies.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And let the space between each cautery be according to the thickness of a finger, and let the cautery be according to the length of the body right side.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not press with the cautery.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the amount of what is burned is according to the thickness of the width of the tendon, and it is not very tight; and if the patient stands on his feet; and if he does not stand, then let him lie down, for he has already extended his limbs, and raise his arms.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And it is possible for you to cauterize these cauteries with a spoon-shaped cautery when you are subtle and prudent in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And be careful not to go too far in cauterization, and let the thickness of the whole tendon be burned so that it reaches into the intestines, for the tendon is here subtle; and know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28:
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	Of the puncturing of an abscess on the liver with a cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When there is an abscess or ulcer on the liver and you want to know if the abscess is in the flesh of the liver or in its membrane, then if it is in the flesh of the liver, the patient's breath will be labored and the pain will be acute.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the membrane of the liver, the pain will be very sharp and often the doctors have tired themselves with its cure.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore let the patient lie on his chest; and feel the location of the abscess with pain; and heat the cautery which is formed like a needle, the shape of which has been described in the other page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And cauterize with that cautery so that all the tendon is burned, so that it reaches the brain, where there is a boil.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And cure that by the cure of other abscesses so that it may heal.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And do not use this form of cautery except that by which the study in the art of medicine is prolonged, and through the hand of which many illnesses are known; but rather that one, although it has been tested in some ways, let us know about it, for it is better.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29:
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	Of the cautery of a hernia.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	We shall describe the old cauteries of the roots of aristology for a hernia caused by cold according to this manner, and it is this that you should take from the roots of aristology: a long dry root which has been found; and let it be of the thickness of a finger.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	And then submerge it in oil and put it in the fire, and cauterize by a cautery in that place which is between the continuation of the furcula with the collar bone; and by two small cauteries below the guids, one slightly declining towards the part where the beard grows, and by two cauteries on what is declining between the fifth rib and the clavicle, declining a little to the back parts; and by a cautery in the middle of the foot; and by another cautery over the stomach; and by three cauteries of the back parts; and by a cautery in that place which is between the two shoulders, and by two cauteries on the sides of the chest below the cautery which is between the two shoulders.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And do not press your hand with the cautery, but let it be in the manifestation of the tendon in action.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And we have already described the ancient ones which are of men, for whom they use cauteries of iron similar to a needle and heat it, and put that in that place which is between the ribs, so that it reaches by that to the abscess and there is suppuration of pus, as we have said in the hernia of the liver.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	But in this piercing with cautery, there is no fear, because the humor will immediately enter the fistula which has no cure.
Capitol .xxx.	Here comes the next line:
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	Of cauterization of the melsa.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you heal the ailment of the melsa with what we have said about the cure in the division and do not differ your cure, then cauterize it according to three ways which are all right, the first of which is that you make three or four cauteries, depending on the length of the melsa, according to the figure of the cauteries of the finger, the figure of which has preceded.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And let there be between each cautery the thickness of a finger or a little more, and the manner of the cautery is the same as that which we have described in the cautery of the finger equally.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not press with your hand upon the cautery, and let the patient be elevated upon his side.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And there is another way of cauterizing which is that you ignite the cautery having two windings, the cause of which we have described in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and elevate the tendon which is in the direction of the melsa where it passes by the sitting of the left patient.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And let your elevation be with which you elevate the tendon according to the length of the body so that there are made cauteries according to the breadth of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And then introduce the two windings, ignite them hotly, into that space through which you penetrate the tendon from the other side.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And then extract the cautery; and thus are made four cauteries.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you wish, cauterize with a cautery having three windings.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And then you cure the cautery after it has ceased to emit heat for several days because it is more convenient than the other causes preceded in the cure.
Capitol .xxxi.	Here comes the next line:
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	Of cauterization of the melsa.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cauteries do not cauterize in an eardrop but in alkantide properly.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you heal the eardrop with the manner of cure which we have described in the division and do not differ your cure, then it behooves that you cauterize with four cauteries around the ring of the eardrop and with one cautery upon the stomach and with another cautery upon the finger and with another cautery upon the melsa and with two cauteries between the vertebrae of the back and with one cautery in the right of the foot and with another cautery upon the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the quantity of the depth of the cautery should be according to the thickness of the tendon.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And then let the cautery remain open for so long that it gets heat for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not evacuate the patient of cure after the cautery with that which it is needed so that there are added to him two tendencies and are prolonged for him with aid of cure.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cautery with which the belly is cauterized should be according to what the shape is above it, and that with which the back is cauterized is olive-shaped according to what its shape precedes.
Capitol .xxxii.	Here comes the next line:
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	Of cauterization of the melsa.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are swollen in drops and are filled with yellow water, then you should cauterize the feet over the bone of the foot in nocary that which is between the auricular and annular, and elevate your hand with the cautery and do not twist it; and then elevate your hand and do not return that at all, because the yellow water oozes.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	It is the cautery according to this shape: and then make upon both thighs two cauteries, and in each thigh let there be made cautery with the tip of the blade of the cautery.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And let the cautery be according to the length of the thigh, and from below the knee and the other by the middle part of the thigh; and above each thigh two cauteries.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And let the wound remain open after cure for a long time so that no water oozes from it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And then cure with those causes which we have described.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Here comes the next line:
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	Of cauterization of the melsa.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When the body of the belly is by rubbing and by moisture that weakens the muscles which are in the stomach and in the intestines and it is cured with those manners of cure and does not differ and sometimes the patient suffers cauterization of vertigo, then cauterize him with large cautery over his stomach according to what preceded in the cauterization of the stomach with the cautery of the circle and with four cauteries around the ring of the eardrop subtilly, and let there be cautery subtilely; and cauterize on the alkantide over olozis greatly or with two cauteries.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if you see the moisture exuberaunt and the patient bear it, then cauterize him on the pentacle and over the intestines and firmly near two cauteries over the stomach and near the groin because that is a perfect cure of youth from which there is no error.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Here comes the next line:
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	Of cauterization of the melsa.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When there are in nature ancient hemorrhoids or one of thick humors rubbing or of corrupt moisture and they are cured with that which we have said in the division and do not differ your cure then cauterize them with three cauteries over the pus below the small vertebra of the back small triangularly, and cauterize above the navel by two ditz.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if it be seen that the stomach of him is swollen and his food not digested and his face sometimes swollen then cauterize him over the stomach with large cautery according to what precedes; and with one cautery upon the finger and with another cautery upon the melsa of him with cautery subtilely, and let the cautery remain open for some time, and then cure it when he is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Here comes the next line:
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	Of cauterization of the melsa.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you excise atheyl then you ignite the cautery that is assemled to a ray.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Then introduce that ignited into that atheyl excised and last your hand until it reaches the orifice of the vein from which the blood comes.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And do that one time or two because if they are several then cauterize each of them according to what we have recounted and then cure those with that which agrees to them in the gums until he is healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize with large cautery upon alkantide then it is better for youth.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Here comes the next line:
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	Of cauterization of the melsa.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not obey the work which we have commanded in its place and the patient is frightened by that then let him be healed by cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Therefore when someone sees a fistula in nature and it is ancient, corrupt moisture and therefore that which is most worthy to be done is to probe it with a subtle tent and then know the quantity of its depth with the tip of the said tent.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Then ignite the cautery which is assemled to a ray.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And then place that cautery in the fistula according to the amount by which the tent is inserted.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And repeat this cautery until those corrupted humors are burnt up, once or twice or three times, according to the amount of your need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And beware of burning nerve or vein; or if the fistula goes to the body of the bladder or the body of the intestine, then beware of all those places; and do not do this unless the fistula is in a fleshy place and you think that it does not penetrate.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	Then heal the place where it was.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the place is sealed and the humors are drained from it and remain like that for a long time, then know that it is completely healed.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the humors are not drained from it, then know that they are penetrating into his bone or his bones are corrupted, or it happens because of those causes which will be remembered in their place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter 37:
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	Of cautery of the hemorrhoids.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When hemorrhoids cause pain because of friction or from being bloated, and therefore the anus of the patient is damaged, then it is necessary to cauterize that area on the hemorrhoids with a cautery needle, of which you will learn the use later.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And soon after cauterize them lightly with a small needle, so that three cauteries will come out lined up, and then more will follow in succession.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter 38:
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	Of cautery of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When weakness and softening occur in the bladder due to friction and humidity, so that the patient cannot retain urine, then cauterize that area at the bottom of the bladder, where the hairs of the pubic region begin, and cauterize with one cautery on the right side of it, and with another on its left side.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And the length of each cautery should be according to the size of the openings of the urethra; and cauterize that area with a cautery at the bottom of the penis, or with two cauteries if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And use a cautery needle according to how it is applied.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter 39:
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	Of cautery of the hernia.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When there is friction and humidity in the hernia, and therefore impregnation is prohibited, and its menstruation is corrupted, and the provocation of them is delayed, and pain occurs due to their retention, then it is necessary to cauterize that area with three cauteries around the navel, as we have already said in the cautery of the bladder; and cauterize with a cautery on the bottom of the penis, or with two cauteries, and use a cautery needle.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter 40:
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	Of cautery for the dislocation of the elbow.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When mucous humors are infused into the part of the elbow, and this is caused by the displacement of its joint, and a sign of it is that the bone is prolonged over the other when they are compared to each other.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the place of the dislocation is blocked in the place where it hurts most.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then it is necessary to cauterize the patient on the part of the elbow with a round cautery needle, once you have probed with a tent in the circuit of that part as it is turned, and so that the part falls into the middle of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And use a cautery needle with a shape similar to that mentioned in the cautery of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if that cautery needle is not available to you, then cauterize that area with three cauteries using a large olive-shaped cautery needle.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And perform the cautery according to the amount of thickness of all the tendons; and then heal that area once it is healed.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter 41:
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	Of cautery of the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain comes in the part of the elbow, and its cause is friction and humidity, and it is cured by what we have said before and does not improve, and that is old, then it is necessary to loosen the patient from thick humors with stinking pills or artificial pills or similar; and then cauterize that area.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And the manner of the cautery in that place is according to two manners: either cautery with burning medicines, or cautery with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	They go according to two known methods: the first is that you cauterize that area on the part of the shoulder with three triangular cauteries according to this shape, and make them deep.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And the space between each cautery should be the quantity of the thickness of the finger, and if the cautery needle is olive-shaped or large.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	Sometimes it should be on the middle part on top of the elbow, so that there are four cauteries.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you wish, cauterize with the circle of which the shape is preceded in the cautery of the dislocation of the elbow, and so that it is a containing circle and burns the thickness of all the tendons.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the manner of cautery for sciatica when pain is adherent to the elbow and is not extended into the hip.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	But if it is extended into the hip, then cauterize that area with two cauteries on the hip over the place to which you turn the patient, and with a cautery on the shoulder for four fingers a little distance from the hairy part.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if it is cauterized with a knife, then the depth of the cautery should be according to the thickness of the tendon.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the pain is extended into the place near the fingers of the feet, then cauterize that area where you turn with a cautery for three points or four or more if needed.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the pain is turned down towards the knee below the hip, then cauterize that area there with a cautery needle.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And beware in all cauteries that you do not go too far with the cautery so as to burn nerve or large artery, and so that through it there is harm to the patient or contraction.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And you have seen one of them who was cauterized on the shoulder and it ended in cautery, and the fire was kindled within so that the tumor obtained the foot, and the fire penetrated and corrupted all of the foot.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	Then afterwards there was a violent pain in the abdomen, and then death followed.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two parts simultaneously, cauterize each according to this manner.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And the wise say in the cautery of the elbow that this is the manner of the cautery: make it similar to an iron ring, and let its circuit be the width of a palm; and let its hole be according to the thickness of an almond or a little more.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And within that circle let there be another third one; and the space between them should be the quantity of the thickness of the fingers of the hand; and those circles are bent into two parts; and let the length of them be a finger or two fingers, and make their edges of iron decently bent in the circles; and this is its shape:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Then let it be heated in the fire so that it bends inward and gives off sparks, and then let it be placed over the part of the elbow, and let the patient lie on his side.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	Then cauterize that area with three cauteries around in one go.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And let it be left for three days; then plaster that area with wax and let the poultice be moist for several days; and then heal that area once it is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Al-Bukhari's sons: Oh, children, we have used few of this type of cautery because of the fear of watching over him, and because we have found few who watch over him.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	Make some of the best cauteries for him who suffers them, and find out his place.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	Make a cautery with medicines that burn, you do two circles having a perforated armlet in which the wing of the door of iron is put; let the length of the parts in the nature of them be two nuts or whatever.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the space between each of the quantity of the thickness of the finger is; and they are open below and above, and let them contain themselves according to this form:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	Then pause on the part of the inguinal of the patient sitting on his side, and press your hand on the part of the inguinal; and take water and pour it between two circles, and the quality of that is with the fire little by little, and hold it for the quantity of one hour, and let the patient endure the biting and the compression of him — because I found biting like that with the fire — until the biting stops.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And raise your hand with the instrument and wash the warm water of all the inguinal area with tepid water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And let him fast for three days and pause on that wound until the blackness of the compressed bruise goes away, and let him fast for some days, and pus will run from him; this is last in healing.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And cure that with ointment until it is healed.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain extends to the thigh or leg, make him a statue that contains water according to how it is done in the inguinal area.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the way of warm water, and I have already written that in the treatise on the rectification of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Take alkali and non-extinguished ash of both ends one part, and grind them and place in a new wave of which the bottom part is perforated by a small hole, according to the quantity that goes into him.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And pause below the bottom of the other wave the other wave with the holes facing down, and pour over that alkali and live ash with tepid water in which you soak those for one finger, and let them compress with your hand by good compression, and let the hole from which the acute water descends into the other wave.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And adjust all that water and pour it over the other live ash and other renewed alkali, because that time is a very strong cure which is administered in medical operations and in cauterization of the other members, because operation makes fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And some medicines are cauterized widely, like thizyc and honey with unsaturated vinegar and ash with soap that they may be mixed.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And Walia recounts from an old man the operation and the cure by which it is healed pain of inguinal and sciatic vein, and magnifies much goodness of that, and says that there is no need for another cure, and that it is healed by one washing like this as it comes back with heat, because very much that goes in bath.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And let it be taken from the fresh juice of figs, and if it is not obtained, take the fig, and let it be ground with a little salt and placed on the inguinal area where there is pain, or in the thigh or leg, and let it be bound.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And let it be left for the quantity of three hours or for the amount that the patient tolerates biting of the compression.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And raise him in a bath and when his body is warmed, put that in the sun, because the pain stops and it is healed.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And know that there is no cover for someone to use cautery with these medicines except the evacuation of the body.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	And now Scrotides said that when with goat's fennel the sciatic vein is cauterized, it would be good to him; and let the cautery be on him according to this way: take wool and be dipped in old oil, and place it between the instep of the foot and between the ankle.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And take dry fennel and inflame it with fire until it is made charcoal; and pause it over the wool and let it go into that until it is extinguished.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And repeat this, and do not stop doing this until the biting sensation comes into the inguinal area and the pain stops.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this way of cautery is called cautery of cows.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter .xlii.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	On cauterization of pain of two.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Some pains are in the back for various causes, such as by chafing or piercing or by excessive discharge, and for similar causes, by infusion of matter rubbing and wet.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And cautery does not apply except in this one species which is made by effusion of matter rubbing.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	So therefore, let there be evacuation of the patient with suppository pills that are similar to them, which are made on the back where there is pain, three lines according to the width of him, and let brands be made with cautery or burning, according to the amount that comes from the tolerance of the patient and his strength.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And let cauterization be made by cautery of point.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, cauterize with three cauteries or four as cautery nail medial according to this form:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter .xliii.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	On cauterization at the beginning of gangrene.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Many times this sickness happens to small children; and sign of the beginning in children is that they get stiff on them the navel by lifting up and down, and movement.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And push on the last vertebra of the back and the knots that it already begins to rise above the others vertebrae.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And therefore when you see this and want to prohibit, then cauterize that with cautery which is circle according to this form:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	that take the cautery on all part of the vertebra evenly.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you want, cauterize in the circuit of the vertebra with cautery of point two lines or three.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And let the points be close to each other.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	And cure the place where it is healed by that which we have said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	And beware that cautery not be administered in gangrene that is made by spasm of nerve.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter .xliv.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	On cauterization of gout and joint pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And therefore when it is healed gout from cause rubbing with way of cure and the pains are not gone, then let it be cauterized.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And let you cauterize that after evacuation in the circuit of the joint of the foot with nails cauteries.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let it be cautery olive of which this is its form:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pains come into the tendons or to the other joints, and it comes many times, then cauterize that on every tendon with three cauteries or four of all part by this cautery olive.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if nails cauteries that those cauteries are necessary to you, then cauterize that and do not press too much your hand on the cautery before, but only surrounding the thickness of the cord.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pains spread to the chest and back, then administer the cautery as we have said in its chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pain is only in the hands and is called sciatica, then make a point in the circle of the sciatic nerve where it is turned, in those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if there is remaining pain in the fingers, then make a point in the circle of the nerve around each joint and on the palm of the hand.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pain is for several days in the joints or muscles, then cauterize all of those parts of the limbs.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And do not discharge the patient from good treatment and the reception of medicines, for if there is good treatment and inflammation is discharged with this cautery, they will be healed by God's help.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 45.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	Of cauterization of fractures.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When a fracture occurs in the angles and hernia protruding through the fascia to the peritoneum, and this is where it begins, then you should order the patient to abstain from food for his day and use mild remedies so that the swelling will subside from his belly.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	Then follow the patient's back between his shoulders and command him to hold his breath so that there is pressure on the area where the hernia has either protruded or appeared.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	Then return it with your fingers and press the fracture onto the bone of the arm by signaling the extremity of which is similar to half of a circle on the ascending parts of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Then ignite the cautery of which this is its shape:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	In its first stage, you cover it in the form of a penis, and you press it into his back with pressure from the penis-shaped object.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient' s thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	Then place the cautery over that signal with your hand using the cautery tool directly, and hold it there until you feel the bone of the arm within the muscle; and repeat with another application if you have not achieved this in the first application onto the bone.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	And be wise to the sensation of the hernia in the time of your cauterization, that you do not burn it so that over the patient there may come death or another great malice.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And be aware when with the cautery you do not touch the bone, your operation is useless.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And see that the cautery of children is subtle according to their size and age.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	Then dress the site of the cautery for three days with plaster until the scar of the fire is healed.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then care for it with other ointments until it is healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And the patient should lie on his back for 40 days while the site is sealed and healed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And see that he receives nourishment according to the length of time of his cure which the bandage on his belly, and so that the hernia does not protrude out due to the effort of healing.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And when he wants to get up after 40 days, then administer a gently made bandage and have him wear it for another 40 days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And he should abstain from work and consumption of food and drink, and violent movements, for when he uses this regimen of healing it will heal entirely.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And I will describe the healing of fractures in the other parts of the belly and so at the beginning, and you do not want to delay it, then cauterize the fracture of that with a red-hot cautery according to its amount, and it should be what is extracted from the codon as well as the third part of it; then care for it with what we have said, and it will be fine.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And now some first people say that a fracture should be cauterized with a triangular-shaped cautery according to its shape, for it is touched by pressure:
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	and there is placed a line that extends by the width on the top of the fracture and another line above it; then place your hand with a nail-shaped cautery, but the first cautery is lighter and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	Of cauterization of dislocation.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When it happens in any limb due to displacement or impact and the pain persists for a long time and does not yield to any healing with medicines, then you should cauterize with a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And the cautery of every limb should be according to its size and smallness, nature and dislocation of it, location and pain of it.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	So if it is healed by the first cautery, then it is good; and if not, then repeat the cautery on it; for it is customary of those pains to be punctured from one limb to another nearby, so that you achieve it with the cautery until the patient is healed.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	Of cauterization of leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	The lepers in some ways are cauterized for great benefit, and greatly if the nature of leprosy is made by putrefaction of fire and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And so when you want to cauterize that person, consider if the leprosy is composite and not cured by what we have said in the division or vice versa, and beware of the patient if the corruption extends throughout his body and all its functions, then cauterize him on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle part of the head, and the second below it, avoiding the forehead; and both over the horns; and one behind, over the nape or neck.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And finally, place your hand with the cautery a little onto the bone so that it makes a slight impression, and of him there are displaced the scars so that the expiration of thick vapors is alleviated from him; and cauterize on the pustules according to what precedes.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if the leprosy is already expanded over the body and appears manifestly, then you should cauterize him with those cauteries which we have mentioned in the head; and cauterize on the end of the nose, and two cauteries on the two jawbones, and two cauteries on the two collarbones, and six cauteries on the two shoulders, and one large one on the collarbone near the chest, and one on the breastbone, and two on the hips, and two on each thigh, and two on each leg, and one on each ankle, and two on the heels.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And beware of the nerves which are over the heel so that you do not burn those.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	And sometimes it is cauterized with a cautery on the arm's bone and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the anus.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And be aware that when you draw closer the cauteries, there is greater benefit and they work better; and be aware that the patient does not have pain from the cautery, as well as those who have it, for the body of him is already stunned.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And see that the cauteries are large or small according to the limbs and joints according to which it is preceded by the properties of the tools.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the cautery wound with a paste made of rye flour, honey, and other healing remedies until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	On cauterization for paralysis.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When a limb is paralyzed or asleep and is not healed by medicines, oils, and poultices, then cauterize the affected limb with a cautery according to the size of the limb or its smallness.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And let your cautery enter the thickness of the vein a little.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And sometimes paralysis is cauterized where the pain travels to the hands and feet, and to the vertebrae of the back, and follows the path of the nerves which move that limb, and the paralysis is relieved.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	But do not presume to do this unless you are skilled in the anatomy of the limbs and the exit of the nerves throughout the body.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	On cauterization for white leprosy.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When leprosy is old and does not yield to any of the healing ointments, then cauterize it with a hot cautery a little according to the thickness of the vein until the whiteness and color are relieved, and its color changed.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	Then treat it with a paste made of rye and lentil flour, roasted olive oil, and leaves of wild rosemary, and pigeon's blood or chicken's blood; let each ingredient be a portion, and all be mixed together; then dip a cloth in it and place it on the affected area until it is healed.
Capitol .l.	Chapter 50.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	On cauterization for cancer.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When a cancer is starting and you want it to stop, then cauterize it with a circular cautery along its rim as it is being rolled.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And the wise say it should be cauterized with the last cautery in its very center; but I have not seen this, for I am afraid it might become ulcerated, and I have indeed seen this happen several times.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And it is more proper that it be cauterized along its rim with a circular cautery as we have said, or with pointed cauteries.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 51.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	On cauterization for ulcers.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When an ulcer is slow to heal, and this is due to an excess of humor which causes it, or to the state of the patient, whether he is old and feeble, or lacking in blood, or due to the season, and you want to hasten the healing of the ulcer; then cauterize along its rim with small pointed cauteries; and then let it be bound up so that it will hasten in its healing.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	But if you want to pierce it with a cautery, then heat the cautery of which this is the form: and place it on the very center of the ulcer so that it may penetrate the vein.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the cautery is in a place which is lower down, so that the arm may be stretched out; then treat it until it is healed.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 52.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	On cauterization for sores.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	A sore is a corruption that wanders in the limb, which corrodes it as fire consumes dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore, if you see this sore in a place which can endure cauterization by fire, then heat small nail-shaped cauteries, and large ones according to what is appropriate in the place where the sore is.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	Then cauterize it all over so that you remove all the corruption and do not leave any cause for it to return.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	Then let the patient lie for three days, and place a poultice of ground herbs soaked in mixed oil over the cauterized spots so that the scars are entirely eradicated and all corruption.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	Then treat it with ointments that generate flesh.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	But if after three days the flesh is born and is healthy where there is no corruption, that is good; but if not, then repeat the cauterization over what is rotten in the affected spots.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And sores are sometimes treated with sharp medicine, for that is mild in place of cauterization.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	But cauterization by fire is the surest remedy.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And I have already described its cure with sharp medicine in division, so take that one when you see an inclination towards cauterization.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 53.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	On cauterization for warts and similar growths.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Many times there are growths beneath the sole of the foot which cause great pain, and they are called warts; and cauterization for these is according to two methods: by fire or by water.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	But cauterization by fire is that you heat the cautery which is bent like the beak of an owl, and let it be made of iron according to the thickness, and let it have sharp edges.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	Then place this heated cautery on the wart, and then revolve your hand with the cautery along the rim of the wart so that the cautery may reach the depth of the wart.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	Let him lie for three days until you see the arm begin to swell.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	Then treat it with a poultice made of crushed mallows and salt, and place the poultice on him for one night, for this will uproot it from its roots.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	Then treat the spot with an ointment that generates flesh until it is healed.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if it does not convert and sometimes occurs in the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet, then understand that you must administer cauterization by water, and take a cannula made of horn or iron or the beak of an owl, and place this on the wart; and let him hold his hand tightly so that he does not move it, and pour a little water into the cannula and drop it on the root of the wart; and wait for the patient for one hour, then remove it, for the wart will have been uprooted with its roots.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And thus do for all of them wherever they occur in the body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	Then treat these warts whose roots are eradicated with ointments that generate flesh.
Capitol .liiii.	Chapter 54.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	On cauterization for trembling.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When one suffers trembling from chafing of a nerve or from fever caused by chafing, or for some other cause similar to these, then understand that you must cauterize him with four cauteries or with V-shaped cauteries on the vertebrae of his back, between each vertebra with a cautery; and let him hold his hand tightly so that he does not move it, and cauterize the feet, and over the stomach with an olive-shaped cautery.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the trembling of the patient subsides and the health of the chafed improves.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter 55.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	On cauterization for accidental wounds in the body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When the body is pierced and pustules are formed which are opened by thick corrupt humors, then understand that it must be cauterized at the very beginning when it appears, and let it be cauterized over the entire orifice of the wound with a fine-pointed cautery made of myrtle wood, the end of which is extended by fire; or with the edge of a long pair of tweezers; or with a broad cautery.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And sometimes it is cauterized by the release of the humors at the beginning in this way; and if they are not broken, the corrupt humor is expelled causing them to be healed.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	But nevertheless it is better that this be done with an evacuation through phlebotomy.
Capitol lvi.	Chapter 56.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	Of cauterization of a flow of blood accidentally by incision of an artery.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Troops seen there is a flow of blood from an artery which has been cut due to the wound or due to the incision of abscesses or cauterization of the limb, and when it looks similar, and it is difficult to stem that flow.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Therefore if it happens to someone, then you should cover the opening of the artery with your hand and place your finger on it so as to narrow that opening so that the flow of blood is stopped and does not continue to flow.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	Then place on the wound the olive cautery, few but large, and many times, and exhale over it so that they are ignited many times.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And then take one of those, small or large according to the place and wound in which the artery is broken, over that vein quickly, only after you have stopped the flow with your finger, and apply the cautery so as to bind and restrict that blood flow.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the blood is expelled from the opening of the artery when you release your finger and loosen the cautery, then take another cautery that has been heated in the fire, and then do this repeatedly until the blood flow is restricted.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And be careful not to burn the nerve which is here, and that nothing else bad happens to the patient.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to restrict the flow with anything except one of four things: either by cautery as we have said, or by extraction when it has not been extracted, for when it has been extracted, its extremities are burned and the flow is restricted; or that it be bound with a ligature or with a string with great strength; or that remedies whose virtue is to restrict blood flow be placed over it; and that they be bound with a bandage tightly and decently.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	But he who administers restriction decently with a string and with compression by means of burning causes or similar, does not confer it but slowly.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	But if this happens to someone and neither the doctor nor medicine is present, then open the wound on the finger over the opening of that vein as we have said, and understand the great restriction of it so that the blood is stopped from the main part of the wound; and on the artery, the finger must not be released; and over the artery, pour water mixed with a great deal of coldness so that the blood becomes congealed and thickened; but if there is need of cautery or medicine.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Begin the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Of incision and piercing and lancing and phlebotomy and of wounds and of their likes.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are the words of Albucasis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have already said in the first chapter all of the illnesses for which cautery with fire and medicine is convenient, and their occasions and causes, and the instruments in which they are necessary, and we have ordered the chapters from the superior part of the head to the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And we will proceed in this chapter in that same way, so that the reader may be eased from that which he has demanded.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And before we begin that, know, son, that in this chapter is what is in the first chapter on cauterization.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And therefore, be very careful about it, for in the operation which is in this chapter there is often an evacuation of blood by means of which life is at risk due to the sprinkling of the vein or incision over the abscess or opening of a wound or purification of the wound or extraction of an arrow or incision of a stone or similar.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And all of these are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in their case death often comes about.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I admonish you that this does not happen to you in which there is danger, for some times a case of illness due to the manners of men.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And from them some are driven away by their illness and they die, and others due to the vehemence of that which afflicts them, and because of the length of their illness, and there is fear with which it signifies death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And from them is the one who gives you a sign to beware and says that he hopes in his health, and whose illness is harmful to him.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And therefore do not consent to that which he says to you in this manner, and your caution should be greater than vanity and your greed; and presume no cause upon it except certain science which verifies it for you, and from which comes laudable success.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And use in the cure of all your illnesses according to prophecy and indication of that to which health is converted, for it is an aid to you concerning acquisition of fame and memory, of praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Oh, children, may God give you his understanding and not withdraw from you direction and protection, for it is in his hand.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have ordered this chapter distinguished by chapters according to that which precedes in the chapter on cauteries, of the cure of the head to the feet, so that it may be eased from you what you demanded and for which you had need.
Capitol primier.	Chapter first.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	Of the cure of water which is contained in the heads of infants.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	Know that this illness often afflicts infants due to childbirth, and when the mother lifts the head of the infant, she feels its weight.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And sometimes it is due to a hidden cause which is not known.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	But I have not seen this illness except in infants, and to all of them whom I have seen it has brought death, and because of that I have seen the work of it laid out in them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I have seen that an infant whose head was filled with water, and the head of him was always magnified so that a nurse could not bear it because of the greatness of his head, and yet the moisture increased continually so that there was fire of death.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this moisture is either aggregated between the brain and the bone, or is aggregated below the bone on top of the skull.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	Because if the operation in that is of moisture between the brain and the bone and the abscess is little, then you must split in the middle part of the head with an incision in its breadth, and let the length of the incision be two notches so that the moisture runs out, and this is the form of the spatula:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And if the moisture is increased more and the abscess is larger, then here are two incisions according to this manner:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the moisture is below the bone, sign of it is that you will see the seams of the head opened completely and the water is expressed when you compress it with your hand on those parts within; and it is not hidden from you.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	Let you split in the middle part of the head with three incisions according to this manner:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And then draw out all the moisture; and then tighten the incisions with bandages and plasters; and on the fifth day, apply wine and oil over it, and then loosen the binding and cure the wound with tenting and ointments, and strengthen the head with equality; and feed the patient with dry food of little moisture so that the member is comforted and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	There is another way of making an incision, which takes into account the size of the abscess and the collection of pus; sometimes it is larger at the back of the head, or in front, or on the right or left side. So take care with the incision where the abscess appears and the collection of pus, and finish it as best you can.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And be sure not to cut into an artery and cause a flow of blood that would kill the patient through that loss of blood.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter II.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	Of the incision of the arteries which are near the ears, called carotid arteries.
Capitol segon.	Chapter II.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When there is pain in the ears or feet and it has persisted for a long time without response to treatment with medicines, then the best treatment in such cases is to make an incision on either side of the carotid arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And so, when you want to cut those that the patient is holding his head, and you have applied something to stop the arteries from bleeding, then consider where the pulse is; the spots are usually found above the ears, pressed down by some cloth.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And you can feel the pulse on the artery, and you should cut each one with a sharp knife inserted into the bone, and do this all around the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	If you want, insert the knife below the artery and cut through to the bone above.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	The length of the incision should be about two fingers' breadth, because when a vein is cut, the blood rushes out with a pulsing motion, which causes a frequent jerking motion.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	If the artery does not appear at the feeling, then measure from the ear a space of three fingers' breadth, and feel with your finger, and cut into the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And that which flows out is about an ounce of wine,. and very little more or less, and all this is according to the amount that appears from the strength of the patient and the fullness of the artery.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And you should examine the wound, and if anything remains on the bone that would cause an abscess, then cut it out so that no abscess forms.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And you should press the wound with soft feathers and strips of linen cloth, and cure it with ointment until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	Of the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When an old migraine or headache occurs, due to cold humors and qualities in the temples, or a violent ache similar to these, and it is not cured by the usual methods of medicine, then we have found that extraction of the arteries in the temples, or cauterization of those veins as we have shown, is effective.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the way of operating and extracting those is that the patient holds his head by the temples; and you should feel for the artery which appears in the temple, for it is revealed to you by the pulse, and it is hidden in most people by the force of the blood.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden from you, then the neck of the patient should be held tight with some cloth; and you should feel for the spot with a sharp cloth or wet the spot with warm water until you see the artery clearly.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then you take a sharp knife of this shape:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And you should cut the skin with it easily until you reach the artery; and you should cut it inwards and extract that to the upper parts, cutting it out of its sheath and removing it from the surrounding tissues.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	But if the artery is thin, then you should wrap it with a thread, and cut it in one place according to how much it is stretched out and contracted, and there will be no flow of blood, for if they are not tied off, the blood cannot flow out at all.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And you should let out about an ounce of blood. And it is within three.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the artery is large, then you should tie it in two places with strong double thread or cords around it, and do not cut it before the healing of the wound and so that no flow of blood occurs.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And you should cut away the superfluous part which is between two membranes; and do it in that hour or another hour.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you want, cauterize that with a cautery tool into the bone where the ends of it are cut off, and it will be in the place of that cut artery.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it is better done when the patient does not have fever or a heated condition; for cauterization is of those causes which help to dry up moist humors, and so it is better in youth.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And you should also extract the arteries which appear at the site of old wounds, and have powdery ointments applied to them, and it should be cured with dry medicines that make the flesh grow and with poultices until it is healed.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if while you are operating, another vein appears and there is flow of blood from the artery, then you should squeeze that blood with your hand, or cauterize it, or cut it off at the site of the wound, and hold your hand over it so as to stop the flow of blood.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if some of these things are not present to you, then place your finger over the spot where the blood is congealed, and moisten the spot with very hot water until the pain subsides, and hold it tightly according to how you can.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And that which is easier in extracting the artery is that you cauterize it with this cautery tool which has two points, because you have felt the two spots with your finger, and let them cool, ignite it, and apply it to the bone until it reaches the bone and cuts the artery in two places, so that it is stretched out between its ends, for it is not consolidated at all by this cauterization.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the shape of the cautery tool:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And let the points be smooth.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	But if it is better that the points are sharp, because if they are blunt and come close to each other, then do not cut the flesh quickly.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	So if there is any thickness in those, it is held that the heat of the fire is held in them and the flesh is cut away easily.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this work is better than all others and easier.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And let the space between the two points be the quantity of the thickness of a finger.
Capitol quart.	Chapter IV.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	Of the cure of bodies with sharp and sour pains in the chest.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When they are sharp pains, and there is an ache in the chest of those veins which appear above the forehead, and no medicine helps at all, and sometimes the face of the patient becomes red and it seems that there is a walking of ants in his forehead, and the ears of the patient are exhausted, with a moisture which also causes pain, and the ancient ones cure that with a sponge.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And it is that you command the patient to raise his eyebrows, and then cut three gashes evenly spaced according to the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the gash is two fingers' breadth: let the first gash be evenly distant to the length of the nose at the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a little movement of the eyes, and the third from the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And be wary of the beginning of the arches which are on two sides, and extend your hand away from the continuation of both mandibles.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if you space out each start the amount of three beans lined up.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And to you is a sponge prepared or dry rags moves with which you dry the blood.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	Then insert the spatula at two sharp ends, of which this is the shape of its incision:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	That is from the start of the temples into the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Exscrape all the membrane which is between two incisions with the chisel which is on the bone, and then do that of the middle incision into the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And then spread that spatula and insert into the first incision again another instrument which is called a chisel, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And place the side of that sharp over the flesh next to the membrane, and the other side on top of the bone, and move it so that it reaches into the middle fissure, and cut with it all the vessels which descend from the head to the heels.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	Make sure that the incision is continued towards the membrane, and then do that in the middle fissure into the other fissure.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And after blood comes out in equal quantity, squeeze out the places of frozen blood clumps.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then place in each fissure hot water from a kettle, and place on those powdered herbs soaked in wine and oil, and watch that it does not develop an abscess.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day loosen the ligament and administer copious infusion of hot water or tea, and then cure that with basilicon ointment made from rose oil and others so that the wounds are healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	Of the cure of ulcers through cautery and from the holes descending from the parts inside the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When to some comes cauterizations and continuations, and they see holes in the patient's head weakened, and its guard is weakened, and ulcerated eyelids and from there the hair, and in the brain there is acute pain and consequent drawing out, then know through these accidents that the matter and cautery does not come except from many veins proceeding from the parts inside.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best cure for them is this: that you command the patient to raise his forehead, and then insert into it a fissure at the middle place of the forehead, small in width (and begin with the fissure of the left temple going into the right temple; and let there be an incision into the bone; and extend your hand from the lacerts of the temples which are hurt because of chewing), so that the bone is uncovered.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry all the blood with sponge or dry cloth and then fill between the two lips of the fissure with hot water or with linen cloth.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then tighten them above with powdered herbs soaked in wine and oil, so that it does not develop an abscess.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you loosen that and see that the abscess has already diminished, then know that you should rub the bone where it begins to have new flesh, and then cure that with an exsiccative regimen which makes the flesh dry, just as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of rosin and mix them, and from them make a plaster and administer it on these wounds of the native flesh.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter 6.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	Of the cure of what cauterizes in the ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	All cauterization in the ears is of four kinds, for there is mineral stone or cause like stone, just as iron and glass, or it is from plants just as chickpeas or beans, or it is a volatile cause just as water and wine and their likes, or some animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And so when stone cauterizes in the ear or other cause like those causes which do not produce pus in the ear, and you put the ear to the sun, and if you see the stone, then distill into that some cause of rose oil or sesame, and then administer its extract, and make it sneeze with some condiment, and dry up the nostrils because of the sneezing.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And then put in the circle of the ear some pieces of cloth or wool, and extend the ear to the sides above it, for many times it is pierced by these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not pierced, then administer its extract with the instrument called a sub- delicate hook of which this is the shape:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it is pierced with a hook, well and good; but if not, then administer its extract with the slender needle of little bending.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And so if it is not pierced by that, then make a tube of bronze and insert the end of the tube into the hole of the ear and close around the tube with wax and with softened oil so that there is not an opening except for the tube.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And then extract with your wind with strong吸引, for many times it occurs with that which we have recounted.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	But if it is not pierced in this way, then take of chalk alum or of vecc prepared with which the ears are pressed a small amount, and put that into the end of the ear, and then wrap around that decently placed cloth.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And then insert that into the hole of the ear with ease, and then dry up the ear from moisture.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And so if it is not pierced by all the causes which we have recounted, then you cut to such a depth that it does not produce abscess or spasm.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the way to cut it is that you at first make the patient's vein of the temporal vein and extract blood according to the manner of its vertigo, and then do that between your hands and convert the ear to the sides above it, and end with a small fissure in the root of the ear because of the pressure on it in the place which has been touched by it.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And let the fissure be in the shape of the moon so that it reaches the stone, and when you have found the stone with instruments, stop it if you can; then close up the fissure at that moment with speed, and cure it so that it is healed.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause cauterizes in the ear is one of the fats which produce and so inflate, then administer its cure and extract it; but if it does not obey your command, then you take slender spatula according to this shape:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	and administer with that the incision of that fat which is cauterized in the ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not do that when you think that it is already moistened by the vapor of the ear, and put that in many pieces, and then extract from those with the hooks or with the slender hook, or with an incision as we have said before, for it is easier to extract it.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	But when the water which is inserted into the ear causes sneezing at the beginning, and fill his ear with some hot water, and pour that on that ear in which there is the water, and if by that it is pierced, well and good; but if not, then take thin stones the size of a finger and heat them in the fire a little, and let the patient insert one of those into the hole of his ear and press on that part with another stone on top of the first stone.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	And do not stop doing this until all the fluid has been expelled.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc .i., e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And once the fluid has been expelled, take some paper or gauze. and place one end of it in the wound and extend the other end into the fire until its tip is burned.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And place another piece of gauze and do this repeatedly until all the fluid has been expelled, and then place that one with a cannula just as it is said about the extractor stone.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	But in the extraction of a foreign object entering that orifice, if it is a small object, like a pebble and similar to it, cure it just as we have said in the division; but if it is from a large object which caused the wound on the chest, then administer the extraction of it with forceps and tongs, and the cause of it is a pus more than all other causes that enter the orifice.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	But in the extraction of a worm engendred in the orifice, when you cure it with what we have said in the division and in the tract of distillations and do not confer your cure, then be sure that you observe the orifice to the sun.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And therefore if any cause of the worm appears here, then extract it with forceps or a fine tongs, but if no cause appears, then take a cannula below tight and above ample of which this is the shape of it:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And insert the slender end in the orifice according to the amount which the patient can bear it; and then suck with that strongly, doing this several times, until all the worms are expelled.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	But if it does not obey you in the movement, then you wind and close in the circuit of the cannula with wax just as we have said; then administer distillations which the ancients have proved in the cure of worms, and you will find that in the tract of distillations.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let your effusion with which you pour the medical oils into the orifice be by this instrument of which this is the shape of it:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And make that of silver or brass, below tight and above flat, in which there should be a small hole, and smooth on top.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And therefore let it be as an impellence which is in the cavity of the container which is necessary here.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you want, take the reed and wind it in the decently cut end, and then pour oil into the cavity of the instrument or juice of any herb, or whatever you want from these medicines in the cannula —and that is in the orifice—, and then insert the reed with the cut top and squeeze with your hand that one with moderate compression of it until the oil is expelled in the cavity of the instrument and the patient feels the oil within him.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And what is infused into the orifice is already made warm by fire a little.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And be careful that the cause which you distill into the orifice is not too hot, because the medicines of the orifices do not bear that.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter .VII.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	Of the cure of inflammation of orifices.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Some children are born from the bellies of their mothers not perforated, and this happens in some men, inflammation in the middle of the orifice by plague or by flesh eaten into that; and this inflammation sometimes is done in the part of the orifice which does not reach the chest, and sometimes it is in the outer parts.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And what happens in the middle of it which does not reach the chest is in the major dispositions of difficult cure.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in that in which you obtain the chest, be sure that you place the orifice of the patient towards the sun and observe it.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And therefore if you see swelling appear, open it with a thin spathe of which this is the shape of it:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the end of it in which there is a small width, in which one part is acute and the other is not, and the spathe is of two lion’s teeth on either side that it does not hurt the orifice.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And if the inflammation is by flesh born in the orifice or in the middle of it, then open that with fine tongs and cut that violently easily until all the flesh is removed.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the inflammation is in the middle of the orifice, then take a slender reed and heat it with fire a little, and then place that in the middle of the orifice.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And therefore if you have sensed swelling by that the patient feels with facility due to difficulty in breathing, relieve the oppression of it with facility; and be careful not to plague the nerves of the orifice.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then place in the orifice cloth of linen according to the amount of the width of the orifice which you have wrapped in Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure of the healing of the plague, or take some other and soak that in waters and powder over it vinegar mixed with triturated vinegar and use it; and if you see the orifice already pustulated, then be sure to pull off that which you wrapped in linen and replace it with another which you wrap in cerot made from refined oil until the pustule is cauterized; and then cure that until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	But if bleeding occurs, then soak sponge or cloth in warm water and place it over the orifice, and use the other cure which tightens the flow of blood, which is said in the tract of distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter .VIII.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	Of the cure of athezil which approaches the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Athezil which approaches the eyelids of people some time with wetness, some time dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Therefore be sure that you have those with tweezers or tongs, and split them with a spathe of their own teeth, and then place over the places vinegar mixed.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	But if pain comes with flow of blood, then you cauterize those with a small slender cautery.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cautery is when the cuts and tears return after some cause of their teeth has been removed; and when they are cauterized with fire, those teeth are burned and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter .IX.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	The cure of greatness which comes to the eyelids of people.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Many times it appears in the eyelids of people some cause which is like greatness in its strength and hardness, and because of that greatness is called.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And it is an accumulation of thick humidity below and above.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	And the appearance in them is that you consider whether the greatness proceeds in it in anything which appears of the orifice and is swollen all around; and the cause of it is distant.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	And pierce over that with a slit in the width and then scrape all around it with facility until you release it, and then suspend that with tongs and cut it off.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	But if you are not equipped with the incision of it if not that you penetrate the orifice with little incision, then that does not notice in any cause.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the figure is large, then adjust it with a stitch; and cure that until it is healed.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is small, you do not incur evil by that because the humors of it restore that and flesh it.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the greatness is declining at the parts within the orifice of the eyelid you should eviscerate the eyelid and suspend the greatness with tongs, another that you split it off with incision, and press all around it, and if the eyelid by incision is elongated, then that does not notice in any cause.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And then at the beginning, wash the wound with salted water; and heal the area with water until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	Of the treatment of a ulcer on the eyelid above the eye.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	A grays ulcer is engendered in the eyelids above, and mainly in infants, it aggravates the eye of those who have cataracts in their eyes, and they cannot see the clarity of the sun because of this.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And because of this, you will see these people all the time on their faces, and they sleep on their faces; and only in the eyelids below the eyebrows, which are moist, there is inflammation, and an apparent sign of ulceration is in the eye; and when you press the area with your fingers, you feel the ulcer within.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And some method of operation is in that which the patient puts his head into the lap of himself, and then he puts a cloth on him and makes him warm, and then he makes a circle according to the quantity which contains the arachnoid membrane from all sides, and then he places that over it and presses with his fingers from all sides so that ulceration is gathered in the middle of the circle, and then he opens in the middle of that moist area with a spatulate instrument incident to the fissure, and the fissure is not greater than the one made in flabotomy.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	But in the lower cavity you must split all the way through so that you reach the arachnoid membrane, because in most cases of ulceration it progresses into the arachnoid membrane through the fissure according to the form of grayness white.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Then, pull that out with the cloth you have wrapped between your fingers to the sides and revolve it between the right and left hand so that it is removed completely.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And be careful not to push into the fissure with the spatulate instrument so that you do not reach the eye and tear it.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	But if you do not see the arachnoid membrane at the beginning of the fissure, but you push into the fissure a little with ease so that it progresses; then pull that out as we have said before, and then submerge the cloth in water and wine mixture and place them over the area and bind those tightly with bandages.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And if some who have salt and bread, place that in the cavity of the fissure so that what remains from that moist area.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then heal it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	But if ulceration occurs in the eye socket and becomes a cautery, then heal that with soft bandages until it is healed.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	Of methods of touch for the eye.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When in the eyelids of the eyes are born under the natural hairs and are old, then they annoy the eye and cause ways of illnesses as with constant tears and softening of eyelids and membrane so that it is a cause of destruction of the eye which is called tactinir of the eye, and it is healed in four ways: or by cautery with fire; or with sharp medicine according to what was said before in the chapter of cauterization; or it is done as an incision and suture; or with cannas according to what he will say.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And so you put the patient's head in your lap; then turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand, and if it is turned, it is good; and if not, insert a needle into that in which there is pus below the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate above the needle, close to the margin of the eyelid in which the hairs grow, and draw the needle upwards towards the hair, and turn that with the thumb.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And then open the space within the eyelid below the hairs with a spatulate instrument inserted into the tear duct major into the tear minor; then pull out the pus and place under the eyelid small powders of cotton or cloth, and then tie over the eyelid with thread, and it should be as a figure of leaf of myrtle.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	But however it is the figure according to the amount of elevation of the eyelid, because that has been diversified in men, for some there is a great quantity inscribed on the eyelid according to the amount by which the eyelid is softened.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And then open with the spatulate instrument over the two lines you have marked, and begin from the tear duct major into the tear minor.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your fissure is close to the natural hairs as it is the thickness of the king's hair.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And then put the needle in one of the two angles of the codena, and then scrape that entirely, and then press with the incision the two lips with gum or fine wool, and wipe off the blood, and make adhere what overflows from the gums on top of two eyelids with some causes binding, if you want to do that, and if not, it will not be healed.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And then let the incision of the gums heal within three or four days, and then heal that.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you want, let the wound heal without suture, and heal that with something that dries and constricts, because the eyelid is elevated from the sealing of the wound and the gathering of it; but suturing is better. Therefore, I have said these things about tactinir.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	But however, in that there is solicitude over the patient, and it is good operation, and there is not fear in it.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And there is another way in tactmyr, and it is that you mark over the eyelid figure as a leaf of myrtle, and then elevate the eyelid with three nails separated and gathered according to this form:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	But if it is not possible that, holding the nails, and that is not broken, then take a needle in which there is thread and put that into the middle of the figure, and insert the other needle close to the tear duct major, and the needle according to the tear minor, and press between your fingers the gums with equality, and then with those elevate your hand with equal elevation, elevate all the codena over which it has been marked as we have recommended.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then press the two lips of the wound with suture, and heal that until it is healed.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	But if ulceration occurs because of your incision or your fissure, heal that ulcer with ointment and like things, and with bandages.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And sometimes to the eyelid where its hairs are converted, then you use in that what we have said about incision; but suturing in each is more artificial.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	Tactmyr with cannas is according to this form:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	And it is that you turn the eyelid and split the figure that is within according to what he recounted; then with art make two cannas or two astelas of which the length be according to the length of the eyelid, and their width is less than the width of the spatulate instrument.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have already split at the extremities of some parts where you have threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Then gather each one with subtlety over what overflows from the eyelid of the eye, and tighten the cannas from some parts with strong compression, and let that be for several days, because the codena will die and become black and fall off when it has put itself.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	But if it is delayed, then cut it with tweezers, and then heal the wound until it is healed.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	And therefore when it is solidified, the eyelid is elevated and the hairs do not sting.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the form of two cannas which you will make according to this form:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and had the quantity of length and breadth neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter 12.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	Of the elevation of hairs by the hollow needle when the hair is hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When the hairs are not natural, hard and rough, and hollow, then the operation on them is that you take a slender needle and place it in that hollow hair folicle, and then you adjust its end and each one in a very slender manner.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And let the length of the hair be the quantity of a palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And then you put another slender hair under it quickly, and tie its ends if you wish.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And then let the patient's head be in your hand, and be near the sun so that your work is revealed, for it is a subtle and minute operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And then insert the needle into the root of the hair which has a need for cunning, and make it penetrate the eyelid quickly while drawing out that above the natural hair.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And then pull the hair upwards from within and insert that into the eye, and there are one or two or three hairs and not more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And then pull your hand with it so that the hair is driven out with the eye by the natural hair.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	But if the hair is driven out and not drawn, then draw out the eye with the hair that you have bound with it, so that in being driven out, the eye above it will be driven out as well.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And wash the eye with vision, for then you will draw out the hair and the eye, and each one will heal and close the eye, and leave the cloth for two or three days, so that the hair will adhere to its place and grow good flesh on it.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if the hair is shorter, then you take a long hair from among the natural hairs and elevate it with that one or cause it to grow with it so that it lengthens, and then you elevate that one.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter 13.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	Of the cure for a hunchback which comes in the eyelid above.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When there is hunchback in the eye, and it is contraction of the eyelid when it is contracted on one side or the other, due to poor consolidation of the plague or of a section or cauterization, and it is called "leporina", and this hunchback is either natural or accidental, and it happens due to consolidation of the plague or sections or cauterization, or due to similar things in their own cure.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The manner of the operation on it is that you split that consolidation and separate its lips, and put in it what is between those a strip of linen cloth, and tie those so that they heal.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And do not think that you use a cure for it of the causes which dry out, constrict; for if you do that, hunchback will return worse than it was before.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use for it of causes which soften, like fenugreek, and moisten with the water in which are cooked high and seeded herbs, or unguent of squill, which should be liquefied with some of the oils, and immerse in that the strip, and cure with that.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the secret of your cure is to perforate it with great cunning so that it is not consolidated according to the form that it was at the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation which we have said is not anything other than a rectification of hunchback that does not return the form of the place according to how it was before.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter 14.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	Of the cure for a hunchback which is made in the eyelid below.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This hunchback which is made in the eyelid below, which is properly called hunchback; and it is of one natural, or another accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	But accidental is made by plague or by a section or cauterization or other things.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	And the way of operating on it is that you take a needle in which there is a double thread, and put that into the flesh so that the thread passes from the tear duct on the left to the tear duct on the right, so that the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	And then extend the flesh at its sides with the needle and sew it with the needle, and insert it with a broad spatula.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And if it returns the form of the eyelid as you wish, then it is good; and if not, take the needle and put that in the split figure, and with that convert the eyelid, and split both fissures on the sides of the eyelid below.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And let the ends of both fissures be of two angles of the incision which you have made so that they meet, and let an angle be made from them when they are gathered together, and let a figure be made from them.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is a Greek letter: lambda.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And then sew the flesh that for the quantity which it is the side of him below him, that which holds the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then sew the separated parts and sew those with a thread of wool; and then cure those with what we have said of the softening medicines and the poultices so that it heals.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if hunchback occurs by section or cauterization, then see that you split with a flat fissure over the hairs of the eyelid as it was before.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And then separate with the poultice between two lips as we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the end of the speech of the cure of hunchback when it is above or below, let it run in the operation according to how it is prepared for the form of hunchback, and that is in the form of many different shapes.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the skilled artificers prepare cunning in every way that is possible for them so that they make the figure return to its natural form, or near it, and let that patient according to what pleases him of the operation and of the instruments in the greatest dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	Of the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation happens to many people so that the eyelid is hardened above it with the white of the eye, and is prohibited from the facility of its movement and of their natural works, then see that you insert the end of the needle below the eyelid, and elevate it up or extend it with the finger.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And then you insert the adhesion with a broad spatula, which is not at the incision, have it blunt so that the patient is not bothered after the operation, and remove the spatula so that it does not hurt the eye with its acuteness.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And let your incision cut that adhesion with facility so that the eyelid returns to its natural form, and let all the adhesion be healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And then put in the eye salted water with which you wash it; or distill in it of vinegar dissolved in the water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And then separate between the eyelid and the eye with poultice of flax, and put over the eye wool infused in white of egg, and then on the third day use causes consolidating so that it heals.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter 16.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	Of incision of nail and prominence of flesh of the tear ducts.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Know that the nail is according to two manners, for it is nervous and is like a hard, thin cipha; or it is non-nervous, like white moisture solidified, which when the iron touches it, or is forced, it takes in onus, it is split and the onus is not put into it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both spices do not begin but from the greater tear duct that goes little by little covering the sight and prohibiting light and eye movement.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	The way to act in the incision of it is that the patient places his head on your lap and opens his eyelids wide, raising the eyelid with your hand and gently pulling out the lash with tweezers after applying a little pressure to the lash line above.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	Then take a needle and insert into it a horse hair or ox or cow's tail hair or something similar, or the end of the needle itself, little by little and place that in the root of the lash, and pierce with the needle, and tie it with a thread; then extend the hair above to the upper eyelid line, and cut it with the hair, which will cover the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And so you continue this process with the hair going into the back of the eye.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And then you cut the rest of the lash at its root with a very thin blade or small forceps, and cut the flesh of the tear duct so that there is not continuous flow of tears through it.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And sometimes the lash is extended with just thread or with thread and cut; this is how it is done as we have said, and then it is cut with a lion's tooth blade which has this shape:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And be careful not to touch the cornea with the blade and cause a rupture, and that the pupil is perforated.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Then after the incision, pour into the eye a little ground salt or vinegar made from ash wood, and let it sit until the next day; then treat it with water that covers it to heal it.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the lash is not nervous and you cannot insert the needle or thread it with the tweezers, sometimes this kind of lash is cured by medicine and healed as well as eye and re-attached in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to cut it, then open the patient's eye and take a very thin lion' s tooth blade sharpened according to this form:
am subtilitat.	with thinness.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if you see that it is rarefied and confined and has root in the duct, then distill from your eye into the eye made of ash wood or with red wine or salt water, and cover the eye until the next day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	Then repeat the operation until everything is done that needs to be done, unless an abscess has formed in the eye, because then you will cut it and heal the abscess so that it heals.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat your operation on it with reason until it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	If the tear duct is torn in the eye with great injury, then suspend it with thread; and cut it from that one side, and do not finish the incision so that you do not cause continuous flow of tears.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And then distill into the tear duct red wine and vinegar made from ash wood until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter .xvii.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	Of incision of algusardine and of that which is born of flesh joined in the eye.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Sometimes in the eyes of some people, there is born red flesh and it is raised so that it covers the pupil, or it approaches or presses on the eyelids and strongly compresses the eyelids to the outer edges and is attached like a balaster stone.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	But the operation on it is that the patient places his head in your lap and you open the eyes of him and collect all that flesh with convenient tweezers or a forceps; then cut the flesh at the beginning so that everything is finished with the scissors, and be careful of the eye that you do not injure it by your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And let your incision be by which you cut those or with a blade which we have recommended in the incision of the lash, or with small forceps with which ashbell is collected according to how it comes to this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	So when your incision is complete and all that flesh is healed, then fill the eye with ground salt or distill into it red powder of similar medicines which are corrosive and place over the eye a cloth saturated in egg white until an abscess is secured.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if there is any cause of algusardine and the eye is infected with pus cauterized, and you fear an abscess cauterized, then cut the eye and cure that abscess with something that causes that abscess to yield, and then repeat your operation on it until it is healed and similarly do with the flesh which occurs in the eye of this kind.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	But you should take care that foreign body is removed from the eye by natural or accidental way, done with iron, and do not put your hand in any of these operations so that you see that this member suffers those operations.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter .xviii.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	Of collection of sand in the eye.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Sand so comes red veins which are tested on the eye and hinders its action, and it breaks up the eye over a period of days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	So it is necessary at the beginning that you consider if the eye in which there is sand is strong and there is no other disease but sand, then you collect that sand.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And it is that you command the patient to place his head in your lap, and then suspend those veins with one thread or two according to your discretion; and let that thread be of very fine thickness according to this form:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or two threads graded in a cone according to this form:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And then let those veins be collected with very fine forceps, with thinness, and squeeze the pus gently hour by hour as you see those veins are raised from the eye and are drawn back.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And be careful that you do not injure the eye with the tip of the blade; and if your operation is in the middle of the eyeball, and let it stay firm in your operation so that you cut only those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have finished, then distill into the eye red wine or vinegar so that with its acute heat it burns what is raised from the sand.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	But if it is not possible for you to collect everything in that hour, then put a plaster on all of it so that it yields the pain of it, and let him lie for several days until the pain of it is eased and an abscess is secured.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat your operation according to the manner described so that it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the form of the forceps:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter .xix.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	Of reduction of hernia to the nose.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you cure hernia by cauterization or with acute medicine burning according to that it is preceded by the narration of it and is not healed, then there is no harm in it except that you open the abscess because of its maturity, and that you extract all the moisture which is in it and the pus until the bone is uncovered.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And so when the bone is uncovered and you see in it corruption or blackness, then scrape it with an instrument of which this is the form:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And it is formed of coarse hair, and let the tip be made of iron, and let the tip be round as it is made pointed by file or sharpened subtly (so that it is in the following form).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And place that on the place of corruption of the bone and then rub it between your fingers and press your hand gently little by little as you know that that corruption is scoured.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And let that be done several times, and then restore the place with dry and astringent causes.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	If the area is solid and there is healthy flesh born in it, and it is separated from the body's sickness and remains for 40 days, and is not renewed nor pustules form, and no accidents occur, then you shall know that it is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And if not, then it is not in it except to reduce the fissure to the shape of the nose, and according to this manner: you shall uncover according to which bone has rusted or become acute with medicine, and when the bone is uncovered, then you shall take a file according to this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	Let the end of the rust be triangular, and its stem be first extended into the extremity just as it is.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	Then place it upon the bone, and let it be near the tear; and lengthen your hand a little from the hole, and then revolve your hand with the file inside so that it penetrates all of the bone, and the patient will feel it through his touch when air exits through him.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Then restore the area with astringent medicines that dry up just as you have healed.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Then when the flesh and the area are hardened, then the matter which gushed out of the orifices returns to the nose; therefore there is pus on the patient.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	On the reduction of the eminence of the hole.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the hole protrudes in its entirety and no harmful occurrence nor decrease happens, then you shall let the patient be at rest, and afterwards what follows: you shall place windings on his neck after scarification and suck out with good suction; and then place a liniment over the hole which is made of pitch, aloe, myrrh, and mastic, and then strengthen the bandage over the hole with powdered herbs.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the manner of the powders is that you take dry cloths of linen threads, and each cloth be folded into four folds; and make those into threads.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And then place those one over the other according to the quantity for which the hole has need.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And then strengthen over those with a hard cloth and strong binding; and repeat the suction with scarification; and remove the windings and let the hole be tightly bound during the day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	But if meanwhile the ligament becomes soft, then you shall let it be looser.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And then remove the bandage during the day and night just as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that the hole has already been reduced, good; and if not, then repeat the bandage with powders and binding and windings until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	On the beginning of the eminence of the venous membrane.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When a disruption occurs in the venous membrane, and it is prominent and protrudes out of the eyelids just like a grain of sand, and assumes the shape of a man through that, and wants to enter into it, then the operation upon it is just as we have recommended: you shall introduce the needle into the root of the vein at the part below, and then place another needle in which there is a double thread from the part of the tear, and make that penetrate and let the first needle be according to its disposition; and then insert the hole of the double thread and lift with it the part of the vein in the circuit of the needle, and tighten that thread.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	And then withdraw the needle and place over the hole wool infused in white vinegar and let it be until the thread falls with the vein.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then cure the hole with that which comforts it until the wound is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And sometimes gather from all parts with a circular cloth around the hole where there is great eminence, and let it be penetrated by the spatulate instrument that comes to the root of the hole, and run the white moisture, and descend the hole and in the meantime.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De curacio de alconati.	On the cure of hawks.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This sickness which is called alconati is nothing other than putridity which is adjusted in the hole similar to water and is not that.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	But the manner of acting upon it is that you make the patient sit on the seat prepared and straightened, and then take his head in your hands from both parts and hold him so that you see the putridity coming to the parts below, and let it be dried up and not descending, and let the light be blocked, and the patient will see the causes just as he saw them.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not descend below, you shall know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	But if the descent of the putridity is not prepared with that which we have said, then make the patient sit between your hands and then take a spatulate instrument and press it upon him over the membrane covering a small part in the continuation of the conjunctiva with the venous membrane in the corona (within the hole), until the putridity is expelled.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Then when it is expelled, then you distill into the hole water mixed with honey in which you have steeped fenugreek and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then let it be cured by the other causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 23.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	On the cure of water descending from the hole.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already said the spices of the water in the division and what agrees to penetrate with serum according to the health.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Then you shall make the patient sit between your hands over a cowl and let him incline his hole down, he tightening it.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And then place your left hand near the eyelid of his hole, if the hole in which there is water is the left one; or with your right hand, if it is the right one.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And then with your right hand take almonds, if the hole is left; or with your left hand, if it is right.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And then place the end of almonds near the corona by the thickness of the vein in the white of the hole from the part of the tear, and press almonds with force and revolve your hand with it.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And then penetrate into the white of the hole and feel that almonds have already come to a seen cause.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And let the measure of the path of almonds to the root be the measure of the space which is from the pupil to the end of the blackness, and is the corona of the hole; for you shall see with it the pupil through the clarity of the venous membrane.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And then place almonds within the hole where there is water, and then you shall draw it down a little, and therefore if the water descends immediately, then you shall see the patient over which he breaks his sight immediately, and almonds in his hole.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And then rest a little; therefore if the water is descended, then you shall draw it down again before almonds are pressed.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And then when it is dried up and not descending, then you shall withdraw almonds with ease, and revolve your hand a little at a time over it; and then dissolve in the water a little of fine salt of jewels and wash the hole within; and then place outside the hole cotton or felt infused in rose oil and vinegar with honey on it.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	But we and those who are of our time shall pause over that come fried in white vinegar.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it does not obey you with almonds at the instrument of the hole because of its hardness — for it is hard in some men — then you shall take the spatulate instrument which is called albertite, of which this is the form:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And then pierce that joint, and do not finish your hand in the wound, but only to make way for a subtle place.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	Then apply the salve as we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And when you have finished your work, prepare the patient's bedroom in a darkened room where he sleeps on his back with all movements prohibited.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And put in the nature of him that which makes the nature of his body smooth, and do not harm his head on either the right or left side at all.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And the bandages should be according to his disposition within the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And then release him from that darkened room and show him the free light, and let him see some causes, and then return the bandages within seven days.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And don't forget to do this at the time of the cure or immediately after the infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	Have someone move that so that the water can easily and gently flow through it.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	But if pus occurs, then remove the bandages on the seventh day, and correct that with something that reduces pus.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Then you open his vision and place on his face an oral orifice through which he breathes so that he is regulated for several days in the darkened room.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And then let him walk gradually and converse about his causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And know that in some cases the disciple of vision is not excused from seeing some sights, and then you are eager about the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And now it has come to us from some of those who are in the Artach, and one said that there was fire in Ayrac when a woman's eye was pierced and water was sucked out.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	But indeed I have not seen it in our land, nor have I read about it in any of the ancient books; and it is possible that this is new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of the species of women so that it is over those on which he ignores:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And they are made of gold or iron properly, and their extremities are with this triangular subtlety, the acute extremity like that is the shape.
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter .XXIV.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	Of the cure of a nosebleed.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When in the nose there are various growing meats which is some cause that is assembled to scorpion of words, or to polyps; and this disease is called polyps because it is like that pee represented.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And it is cancers of meat, lumpy, of dusky color; and it is that there is no lions' meat of dusky color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore in that which is in these meats of lions not fraudulent or cancerous, you should make the patient sit between your hands and expose to the sun, and open his nose, and pick the meat with your finger into those meats.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And then extract that to the parts of a hole, and then light it with what you have understood from those by sharp spatum of one part within which you know that all the meat is already torn out; for if he bleeds from it any cause for which the abscision is possible, then you rate it with one of the subtle instruments with ease within so that he does not bleed any cause.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	But if it bleeds or occurs pus, then you place in him what you should; or it is of malignant pustules, then you cut and cauterize that within so that bleeding has stopped and all the holes are closed.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And then let there be placed in his nose properly vinegar and water or wine.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	But if the nose is open and from it processes humidity within the palate, then you know that he has healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	But if the humidity does not penetrate according to that, then you know that within him is meat growing in the nose, the bones of which are not come off.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Therefore then you should put the gall of the chicken in which there is any thickness, and insert it into his nose words, nuts of the words, and place between each nut the quantity of a pea or less, and insert the patient's finger and put one end of the gall in the nose with the thumb or another cause that is possible for him.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And then after that is done, that he breathe his odorant into the passages of the nose, and let it sit on his gullet, for troops of sight make children in schools, and it is a light cause to him who wants to do so.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	And then place the two extremities of the gall, one end that hangs over the nose and the other that pierces into the nose, and then administer meat with the nuts that are in the gall, and do this until you know that the meats already are on the nuts of the gall.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	And then pull out the gall, and place in the nose properly an abstraction of blood a lump, and do this for three days or more until the meat has run off from the meats.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And then at the end of the cause, place in the nose a cannula of lead for several days until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	But if you see that there is no healing from the cure, use that.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the instrument to cleanse with which are distilled oils and medicines in the nose:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And do this of silver or gold, which is like a small open vase, like a little cone, and the meat similarly.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you want, make a closed cannula like a reed, and the cannula of the instrument to cleanse is flat, uncovered; with which you handle in his behind, with which you have that when heated in him oils or water that you want from the sucks and the causes suctionable.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And these cleanses are precious: take of beaver' s testicles, of white vipers, of ginger, and pepper long, of saffron, of galingale, of spikenard, of aniseed, and one ounce of frankincense. You mix with honey and juice of bloodwort and of cauld, and the pills are made, and a pill is tempered with water tepid, and let it be inserted in the nose of the patient lying on his back.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter .XXV.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	Of the thills in the extremities of the nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Many times there is pain in the extremities of the nose, and it is magnified and swollen for several days until it is taken off the guard of him.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And then you should insert that in the beginning of his appearance, and you remove all that.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	And then place over the place a cautery or burning medicine which is in the location of him.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	But if its abscission is delayed so that it is magnified, then consider if it is lappified, hard, of dusky color and of little sentiment, then do not touch it with iron which is pustule cranios; for many times when you insert this pustule for him great malice over that from whom he had.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the pustule is of meat touch and not of dusky color, and it is possible that abscission in all that, then evacuate the patient and insert that senseless, and bind the location with what bleeds and tightens so that it is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter .XXVI.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	Of the sewing of the nose and of the lips and of the auricle when the continuity is dissolved by water or similarly.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	You know that when there occurs solution of continuity in one of these cartilage, few confer in that operation but in some men.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Thus, when for any reason at all you see a fresh wound with its blood, then you stitch together the two lips of the wound and then heal that part which is inside.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the lips of a wound that is already separated are both healed, then you must open up each part of its flesh so that blood can come out.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then stitch together the two lips with a thread and strengthen them, then powder the wound with dragon's blood and cut up herbs, and place on this powder an ointment called diafinicon or another of the consolidating ointments, and let it remain there for two or three days, and then remove this ointment and change the ointment and leave it there until the wounds are healed by themselves, and then heal them with an ointment.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	But the way of stitching is to join together the cut or with a needle as we have recommended in the stitching of the belly, or join the cut with fat just as you and your father have done and make it known.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	Of the extraction of those causes that come from both lips in the parts within.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Many times we see in many men in the parts within their lips some hard growths similar to grainy err-like growths, and some of them are smaller while others are larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Thus you should turn the lips inside out and cut each of those hard growths from every part, and then stop the bleeding by filling the wound with cut sage, and wash it with wine and heal the place with something astringent until it is healed.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	Of incision of the flesh attached to the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Many times there is on the gum a growth of flesh which the ancients called albulus, therefore you should suspend it with tweezers or forceps and cut off that growth at its root, and let the pus run out or the blood flow.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	And then place on the wound cut sage or other astringent or drying powders.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if that flesh returns, then cut it off again and cauterize it, for by cauterizing it will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	Of extraction of teeth with forceps.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When on the surface of the teeth in the parts within the gums and between the gums are rough, hard sores, some of which are blackened and are made yellow or green by corruption and the teeth become bound.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And so you should force the patient to open his mouth and place his head in your lap, and cut the teeth where those sores appear, and get rid of the causes that appear like sand so that no cause remains hidden within them, and this will be done for the blackness and the yellowing and the others so that they are cleansed.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	And so if this is done at the beginning of the cause, that is good; and if not, then you should repeat the cause over them on another day and on the second and third until it comes to the final state that you want.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And know that teeth have a need for many pliers of various shapes and figures according to how they are prepared for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And so the pliers with which the tooth is cut from its root is another than that with which it is cut between the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of pliers should be prepared by you as soon as you see them:
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter 30.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	Of extraction of teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	You who should cure the tooth of its pain with every effort and delay in total extraction of it, for there is no cause that exceeds its appearance when it is extracted, for it is a sublime substance that is an obstacle to extraction.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	But when the patient is forced to have that tooth extracted, then you must be certain which is the aching tooth, for often the pain deceives the patient and seems to be in a healthy tooth, and you extract that one and the pain does not cease until the aching and ill tooth is extracted, for we have seen this by the operation of barbers.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	So when you are certain which is the aching tooth, and you know it well, then you should scarify all around the tooth with a spatula in which there is some medicine, so that it is dissolved from the gum all around, and then pull it with your fingers or with thin forceps little by little until you loosen it.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And then hold it firmly with strong fingers or a strong grip, and place the head of the patient between your knees so that he does not move his head, and then pull the tooth according to the straightest way without breaking it, nor giving great pain to the patient.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And so if it is not loose, then take one of those instruments and put it under it from every side with ease and force the removal of it just as it was done at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	But if the tooth is split or hollowed out, then you should fill that crack with cloth and tighten it with the tip of a subtle needle so that it is not cracked when you constrict it with your fingers.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And you should open completely with scarification all around the gum and guard your strength so that you do not crack it or tear a part of it, and return to the patient because of the malice so that his first pain is minor.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And take care that you do not do what some ignorant barbers do in their foolishness and audacity in extraction of them, for they do not administer what we have recommended; for often they bring upon men great diseases which are difficult to cure because they crack them or pull out bones from the jaw just as we have often testified.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And then the extraction of it should be washed with wine or wine vinegar and salt.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if then it bleeds through that, then take some quantity of pyrite and spread it over the wound, and if it does not agree with that pyrite, cauterize.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The form of the pliers and tweezers with which you have cut the tooth at the beginning should be of long length, short handle, and thick, so that they are not bent when you operate with them.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And they should be as thick as a finger's length so that when you tighten them they are not bent, and they should have short handles.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And they should be made of Indian iron wrought with hammer and chisel, and in the tips of them there are teeth which some enter into others and tighten with great constriction, and sometimes the tips of those are shaped like the beak of an owl which is hooked, and it is strong.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	Of extraction of teeth and pulling out of the bones from the jaws that are cracked.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you should extract the tooth which is cracked for some cause, then you should place over the site a poultice for a day or two until it softens; and then insert a hook or tweezers in its tips which are joined together like the beak of an owl called ciconia or hooked, the form of the pliers:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	Their tips should be made inside with a file or chisel.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if you do not listen to me and use these forceps or tongs, then you will need to cut into the root and remove all of the flesh and insert the instrument called an awl. This is a small lever whose shape is as follows:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And it should have a blunt end that is slightly thick, and not be bent so that it does not break.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	Therefore if through this the root is perforated, it is good; and if not, assist yourself with these other instruments of which these are the shapes: the shape of the first instrument is triangular at its end in which there should be some thickness:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The shape of the second instrument is that it should have a triangular and very thin end.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And you are already assisted with this instrument which has two claws, whose shape is as follows:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	and with other instruments which are used in tooth extraction; for it is done with this instrument which resembles a large needle, and this is its shape:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	of the triangular bent or short end, which should have some thickness, and not be bent so that it does not break.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And another thing: the instruments for removing teeth are similar to other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	But the wise and skilled artist in this art finds for himself methods according to what the operation and various illnesses indicate to him; for there are diverse illnesses to which the ancients did not attribute nor assign a specific instrument because of their varied forms.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the jawbone or other bones in the mouth are broken, or if there is pain, then it is fitting that the foot should be cured in its place with whatever of the instruments and tongs we have mentioned for tooth extraction, and assist yourself with a gesture whose shape is as follows:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And there should be some thickness added to it little by little, and it should be pressed or held in the mouth so that it does not escape or leak out until all of the bone is perforated; then restore the area with appropriate medicines.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if there is a small wound in the bone, then scrape away the wound and its blackness, and cure it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter .xxxii.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	Of the curing of teeth that protrude above the others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When teeth are prominent not according to their natural form, especially when it happens in women and especially in elderly women, then you should consider: if the tooth is next to another tooth and it is not possible for there to be a hole or groove made in it, then extract that tooth; but if it is attached to another tooth, then insert that with this instrument whose shape is as follows; it is similar to a pig's jaw, and it should be made of Indian iron with an acute end.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And your incision should be with which you insert that into it for several days because of the hardness of the tooth, and that it does not affect any of the other teeth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if there is a prominent tooth that has been sharpened, then file it with an Indian-iron file whose shape is as follows:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And it should all be made of Indian iron and the edge should be even; and it should have very fine points like a file with which needles are made, with which the tooth is filed little by little over several days with ease, so that no other tooth is affected or breaks.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	Then smooth it in the end, and scrape away at that with a razor-sharp knife.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if there is a tooth of which one part is broken and it hurts the tongue, then you should smooth that until the sharpness of that fracture is blunted and smoothed out, so that the tongue is not hurt or speech impaired.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter .xxxiii.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	Of the restoration of broken teeth with gold or silver.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When it happens to teeth that they receive concussion and removal due to impact or being knocked out, and the patient is unable to hold down food, and your cure with astringent medicines has not helped, then so that they do not become rotten there should be made in those that are strengthened with gold and not silver; for silver becomes black and then rots after a few days, but gold never changes color.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And the gold should be in such thinness and thickness according to the amount that can enter between the teeth; and the shape of the filling is that you take the gold and place twice as much between two healthy teeth, and then that it grows with two curves of the gold between two broken ones, or if one or several, so that the fabric comes to the healthy tooth on the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	Then repeat the filling into the part from which you begin, and strengthen your work with ease and skill so that it is not broken.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And your filling should be so that you strengthen the gold over the roots of the teeth so that it does not leak out.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And then cut off the excess gold with tongs or tweezers, and add those to each location with a gesture, and smooth them over and conceal them between the healthy tooth and the broken one, so that they do not hurt the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And then let it be sealed as tight as possible with Roman pitch.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	But if it is loose or broken, strengthen that or them with other gold in the same manner at all times.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the form of teeth and the figure of the filling of two healthy teeth and two broken ones, as they are bound together:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when a tooth or teeth return to their place after being knocked out and are grown back as we have described, and they become broken again.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And it does not happen unless by a wise and skilled artist.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And some have become apt for some cause of cow bones, and it is made into the shape of a tooth, and it is placed in the location where the tooth failed, and it is strengthened as we have said, and remains and serves with that person for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter .xxxiv.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	Of the incision of the ligament which appears on the tongue and prohibits speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament which appears beneath the tongue in some people is either natural or happens accidentally due to a wound and has already healed.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation on it is that you open the mouth of the patient, you see his jawbone beneath; and lift up his tongue, and then insert that nervous ligament according to its width so that the tongue is released from its binding.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	But if there is any hardness or knotting in it, and that is standing due to the healing of a wound, then you pierce it with a needle and cut it according to its width so that you have cut the ligament and the knotting is dissolved.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And be careful that there is not made a crack in the membrane of the flesh and that you split the artery and blood flows out.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	Then wash the traces of the incision with rosewater or with wine vinegar or with pure water; then place the tongue in its socket, so that it is not moved from its socket again until it has healed properly.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	But if blood flows out, place vitriol on the spot; but if the blood oozes out, then cauterize the spot with a caustic that is appropriate for it.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	Then that is cured with the other causes so that it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter .xxxv.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	Of the extraction of a ranula beneath the tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Sometimes it happens under the tongue an apostema resembling a wart that prevents the tongue from its natural movement, and when it becomes enlarged so that it fills the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the operation on him is that you open the mouth of the patient facing the sun and consider the abscess.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you see it dark in color or black, hard, and the patient feels no pain in it, then do not touch that place.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it turns white, with moisture in it, then insert the needle into it and pour in some subtle vinegar; and if blood comes out during your operation, then place a wound pack over it that is made of vitriol, until the bleeding stops.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then return to your work on it until it is healed with pleasant wine and salt; and cure it with another cure until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter 36.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	Of the extraction of an abscess from two ears and that which is in the throat, and of other abscesses.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When an abscess occurs in the throat, there are glands which are clustered together like cotton; these are driven out and are named two ears; when you cure them with what we have said in the division, and they are not healed, then consider if the abscess is hard, dark in color, of little feeling, then do not touch that with iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is of red color and the root is thick, then do not touch that with iron for fear of the flow of blood; before you leave it, let it become mature, and then either you will cut it out or it will burst by itself.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is of white color, soft, and the root of it is subtle, then that is what should be pierced.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the operation on him is that you consider, before your operation, if the abscess has rested on him completely or has diminished by any diminution; and then make the patient face the sun, his head in your lap, and open his mouth, and the servant holding his hands take hold of his tongue with a noble instrument of which this is the form:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And it should be made of silver or bronze, and be subtle like a needle.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	So when you press with that the tongue and it is shown to you the abscess, and you put over that your vision, then take needle and pierce that in the hollows outward as far as you can.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Another is that you draw out some cause from the membranes; then cut that with an instrument of which this is the form:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	It is like tweezers, except that the ends of it are curved so that the holes of each of those are in the direction of the other, very sharp, and it should be made of iron heated in vinegar.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	But if this instrument is not available to you, then pierce that with vinegar of which this is the form of it: And it should be sharp on one side and blunt on the other.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And after you have pierced one membrane, pierce the other according to this manner of piercing, and then let the patient gargle with water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if blood flows out, then gargle with water of decoction of the rind of pomegranate or of bay-leaf and alike to that of the causes astringent until the flow of blood is stopped, and then cure that until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And sometimes in the throat there are other abscesses besides those two ears, and you pierce those according to what we have said in the piercing of two membranes equally.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And I had medicated a woman of an abscess which was in her throat; the abscess had turned dark in color, of little feeling, and it had closed up her throat, and she was breathing with difficulty, and she had forbidden herself food and drinking water, and she was coming near to death unless she had stayed for one or two days.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the abscess had pushed so that it had made two bumps within that they were pus for two months.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	So I cut him up with a scalpel and inserted one of them in it, and pulled that out; and there came out of him a great portion, and then I pierced the other side where I understood the other pus was, and then I bound his mouth, and held down his tongue, and then I put the needle in that abscess.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And then I cut away a great part of it, and not much blood flowed out of him.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Then the throat of that woman was absolutely open, and she began to drink water at once, and then she ate food; therefore I did not cease to pierce that abscess many times for a long time, and the abscess occurred in the place where that one was, which was prolonged.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Then I cut and cauterized her throat, therefore the addition of that; and then I walked around and did not know what God had done to that; therefore my marvel grew at that.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter 37.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	Of the piercing of the navel when it is abscessed.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When there is pus in the navel, and it is abscessed and long, then it is named perpendicular; and if it is thick and round in the lower part, then it is named buba.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	But when it is healed with what we have said in the division and does not comply with your cure, and you see that the abscess cauterized is last in him and is subtle; and if it is to that length, and it is blood-red, dark in color or black, and there is no feeling in it, then beware of piercing it, for there is fear over the patient.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you see that according to the manner which I have said of its whiteness and length, that you make the patient and press his tongue with the instrument of which I have described the form; and then put the needle in the new one, and pull that down and pierce that with one of two instruments of which I spoke in the piercing of two membranes.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And beware that you do not pierce it unless what is adjusted over the natural term with its addition, for if you pierce further, you will cut his speech.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And after piercing, use what we have recommended in the piercing of two membranes, and cure that until it is healed.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the patient is frightened by the piercing of him, beware that you use a needle in cauterizing him without fear, and the manner of the cautery in him is not but with sharp water; then let the head of the patient be in your lap, and then press his tongue with the instrument of which we have spoken, and then take the water which we spoke of in the chapter of cauterization, and comply with that living cause, and pause that not thick nor subtle, and of that fill the concavity of the instrument of which this is the form:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	Let the hollow of it be concavity in which is stopped the medicine likewise with the concavity of spoon of rosewater, and pause the instrument with the medicine over the navel; and let the patient jaw over his lap so that run saliva or mouth mucous membrane of that medicine, so that no other cause on the throat of him and that you lead that.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And then hold your hand over the medicine, and squeeze that on the uvula through the space of a half-hour until you see it blackened and subdued by the biting of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you want, take a needle and wrap that over the end of the rose water; then submerge the needle in the medicine and insert the rosewater into a tube so that the needle adheres in that tube, and do that as many times until you achieve what you want from cauterizing the grape; then let it be blackened as it dries and falls after three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you feel that the medicine should be repeated, repeat it, and then cauterize it by wiping it with a cotton swab dipped in wine, and cleanse it with the water that was used to dissolve the medicine, and wash it with warm water, and treat it from the outside with embrocation, and on the inside with healing remedies until it is healed.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this kind of treatment is more safe than incision and less painful.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Sometimes, ulcerations of the uvula are healed with something more subtle than cauterization or incision: take myrrh, hyssop, oregano, rue, Arabic thorns, camomile, brot and similar to those herbs, and mix all these ingredients, or some of them, in a bowl, and let them be soaked in mild vinegar; and the bowl should be covered with a decent lid, and there should be a hole in the middle of the lid, on which an appropriate hollow instrument made of silver or brass is placed; it should be fashioned out of silver or brass.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And the end of this instrument is inserted into the mouth of the patient so that the steam reaches the uvula, where it is very fogged up.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And then repeat this process several times until it is dry, and be careful not to perform this treatment during the rising of humors, for it would cause too much pressure on the swelling; instead, wait until the swelling has subsided before cauterizing it.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	But if you do not have this instrument at hand, take a reed and attach a ball of wool to its end, so that it fits into the mouth of the patient; for the wool prevents the steam from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this treatment is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter 38.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	On the extraction of thorns and other objects that stick in the throat, and on other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Sometimes, there are things stuck in the throat or a thorn from the foot or some other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	So you must pull out whatever is visible, using an instrument in front of the tongue, so that it can be seen clearly what is in the throat.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And if there is something hidden in the throat that cannot be seen, the patient should be made to vomit before the food has time to digest in the stomach; for often the cause of the throat lies hidden in the throat and is dislodged by vomiting; or let the patient eat a piece of bread or a leaf of lettuce or a bite of dry bread; or take a piece of dry sea sponge, soak it in vinegar, and then swallow it, for when it reaches the place where the thorns are stuck, they will be dislodged.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	Or take an eel and dip it in vinegar, and let it lie there until it is soft, then swallow it, for it will be driven into the place where the thorns are stuck, and they will come out; or take a needle and push it in and pull it out.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	But if they are not dislodged by these means, then use a lead instrument shaped like this:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And it should be thicker than a little finger, and at its end there should be a cavity which you insert into the patient's throat with ease.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And let the patient tilt his head back, and be careful not to touch his throat bones, so that he may pull on it or press on the bone or thorn with his hand, or that the doctor do so with his hand.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	But the patient himself should do this, for he knows best where the cause is located and can press it down from above while pulling up on the instrument, according to the amount by which he is able to relax; then it will be dislodged.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter 39.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	On the extraction of a blood clot from the throat.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When there is blood clotting after we have described the treatment with remedies and they do not work, then consider the throat of the patient on the upper surface, for you must examine his tongue with an instrument which we have recommended.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	So if you see the blood clot, remove it with a small needle or with a thin, decently pointed instrument.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if you cannot remove it with that, then take a hollow, curved tube and insert it into the patient's throat; then place a red-hot iron in the cavity of the tube, and do this as many times as necessary (until the blood clot is dead and comes out of the throat), and the patient abstains from water all day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	And then take a sponge soaked in warm water, and wipe the patient' mouth with it; and do not drink anything else for an hour or more, wiping his mouth with the sponge every now and then, for as soon as he feels the water, he will spit out the blood clot.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	But if it is not dislodged by what we have recommended, then smoke the patient' mouth with camphor or asafetida through the instrument which we have recommended for smoking the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do this, according to how bad it is.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And there is another way of smoking it: take a bowl in which are burning coals and the bowl is covered with a cloth, and in the middle of the cloth there is a hole, and place the end of the instrument in that hole; then smoke the patient; let the patient tilt his head back so that the smoke reaches the blood clot, for when he feels the smoke, the blood clot will come out.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if it does not work, then repeat the smoking many times; and let the patient abstain from drinking, and eat salt and vinegar, and do not drink water, and with this regime it will be dislodged.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the shape of the instrument with which blood clots are extracted from the throat when they are seen; and it is similar to forceps except that it has some curvature:
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	which is inserted into the throat; its end is similar to a stork's beak, which is hooked, and on it there is an aperture, so that when we press down on any object, it does not slip.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter 40.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	Here is the sum of the discourse on the diagnosis and section of abscesses.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	Abscesses are of many kinds, according to what we remember of them, of each one in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they differ in their piercing and sectioning by two means: one is for abscesses in themselves; and the other is for those caused by moistness.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second way is according to the places in which they occur: for an abscess in the head is different from an abscess in the buttock; and an abscess in a fleshy place is different from an abscess in a joint; and each of them is treated differently by sectioning.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And there are some abscesses which need not be pierced, but only mature with poultices on them or their complement.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	And other abscesses are those which are not punctured unless they are mature with poultices on them; and if they are near a joint, the flesh around it is prolonged as the pus is discharged from it, and it causes a contraction of that member, or it is near an important member, and if you delay piercing it until it is mature, then it will affect the main member; or it is near the buttock, so do not pierce it unless it is mature; or it is near the anus, so do not pierce it unless it is completed, lest it affects the parts within the anus, or it is made in the end of it that it is not healed.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	But know that you know the time of the puncturing of the pustule, and also when it is mature.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And know that it has matured when there is a decrease in pain and fever, and also a decrease in redness and pulse, and the tip of the pustule becomes blunt, and other signs appear.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And know that the puncturing should take place in the most lower part of the pustule, and also when pus comes out from the healing of the eminence.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And the puncturing should always be done lengthwise along the flesh or body, if the pustules are on the hands or feet, and in places of the joints, of the tendons, of the nerves, of the veins; and, lastly, in all places alike, in which there is no reflex; for in those where there is a reflex, use puncturing according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	But when the pustule is in a fleshy place, it is better to let the puncturing be done after the digestion of it is confirmed, as we have said; for if you puncture it before that, the body of it is prolonged, and much filth comes out, and its lips become hard and deep.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	But some pustules are punctured according to the breadth of the flesh or body, as need requires, or according to that member which feels pain.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And you shall give a small puncturing in the great pustules, and a large and ample puncturing or many small ones according to the diversity of the sizes of the pustules.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And others are of pustules in which the cord is hollow and cut, when it is made thus that bread and is made in a term that it was already, as with that which happens in trots of dublec and of buboes.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And of those are in which it is cut with three angles; and of those is in which it is cut thus as the shape of a leaf of myrtle, as well as the pustules of the armpits.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And of them are in which round incisions and lunar incisions are administered, and resembling those.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	But to him to whom it is not thus with his pustules, superficial or flat incisions are made only to the superficial ones.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And when the pustule is large and has already collected much pus, you shall puncture it and not be afraid to extract all of its pus in that hour; have extracted a part of it, and then close up the pustule until the next day, and then extract a larger part, and do this several times according as there is a discharge.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	And especially if the patient is of a cold nature, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or an old man in decrepitude, for the animal spirit is many times dissolved by the discharge of pus, and the patient dies soon after, and you operate on them.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	So keep this chapter with great caution, and then your puncturing in which you puncture these pustules, wash the wounds and consider therefore if the wound of the pustule is small, or a flat section, then you shall administer the which of oil or of old vinegar; and if the pustule is large, and the fissures of the puncturing are many, then you shall pause with your fingers in each crack until they come together.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if in the pustule a part of the cord is cut off or you have hollowed it around its circuit, then you shall complete it with old vinegar or with thread made of linen cloth, thus as when you treat boils or ulcers, without moisture; and strengthen it on the third day; and then process it and cure it with that which you use for ointments until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	But if there is a flow of blood in the hour of your operation, then you shall administer water and vinegar rubbed together with a linen cloth, and place that on the place of the flow of blood several times.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	But if the flow of blood persists, then you shall administer medicine and cure it with powders which I have recommended in many places of this our book and division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	But if it is in the winter time, and the place of the pustule is a place of many nerves, then you shall pour powder into vinegar and hot oil, and place that on the places.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is in the summer, and the places are fleshy, then you shall place powdered herbs moistened with water and oil or vinegar and oil, and do this every third day as we have said, and then open up the pustule and wash it and administer to its cure that which is convenient to it until it is healed.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And thus is what is necessary of the knowledge of the cure of pustules universally, but according to the way of distinction I have already said of each pustule in what manner is the way of its cure specifically.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter 41.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	Of incisions of pustules which come in the cord of the head.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the cord of the head are small pustules, and they are of species of knots which contain membranes that are made to them; and the species of them are many.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And from them are bumps, and from those is contained moisture resembling lime.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And from those are which contain moisture resembling powder, and resembling them; and from those are which are scaly, hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the section of all of them, and in the extraction of those there is no fear, as you must extract them it does not contradict the artery.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation in the section of those is that you express those with an instrument the form of which see below, the one which is called entromes, knowing that it contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	For if what it contains is moisture, then split that one with an incision according to its length by a superficial incision according to this form:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And begin in the incision of line .B to line .G. So when the moisture is discharged, then you scrape that one by which it contains that moisture, and let there be no cause of any, for repeated incisions return if there is any cause from that one.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And then immerse vinegar in Egyptian ointment, if it is present, and if not, in water and salt; and fill that with that the wound and let that stay until another day, for by that you corrode all that is broken of that membrane.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And then apply ointment to that one again secondly and thirdly if it needs it, knowing that you are confident that there is no cause of that membrane; then cure the wound with ointment until it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if the pustule contains a knotted vein, then you shall cut that one according to this form:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	By incision having the shape of a cross, and cut hooks between two lips of the incision and scrape that one throughout its length, and apply your strength in extracting the membrane which contains that.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	But if your artery opposes you, then do that which I will tell you first.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And similarly do in the pustule suppuration of incision and cure as we have said; and incision on suppurating pustule is less bloody, for it is of little blood and little moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And some times some of these pustules are in the head in some people with whom there is no moisture; the cause of which is that they have hit upon one in the head of an old woman and rubbed the pustule thus with a hard, rough, white pebble, which could not be touched, and if it hit any person, it would blister.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	But for the other abscesses in the head or elsewhere that are not included in this chapter, as well as the abscesses that occur on the heads of children and from the roots of the ears, the incision of all these should be superficial.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And make the incision in those with the lower part of the pus so that it drains the body of the pus to the lower parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	Then treat those with what is convenient for their healing.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 42.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	Of the incision of scrofula which happens in the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	These abscesses often appear on the neck, armpits, and groins; sometimes they occur in other parts of the body as well.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And some are generated among them, and all scrofula of these is within their own membrane, as well as in the nodes and abscesses of the head, as we have described earlier.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	And the kinds of these scrofula are various: some are stony, and some contain humidity, and some are malignant and do not respond to treatment.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Therefore, when you see one of good disposition in the Touchment, whose color of what is manifest is close to the color of the cord, and is swollen all over, and is not attached to the nerves of the neck, or to the veins, or to the artery, and is not deep, you should investigate that with a superficial cut from above the line of 30 degrees to below the body of the line of 24 degrees, and score it from all sides, and stretch out its lips with a hook, or with several hooks if you have need of them, as we have said in the abscesses of the head, and extract it little by little.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is more careful that the vein or nerve not be cut.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And be careful that the spatula not be very sharp so that it does not accidentally touch you with the incision or disturb the patient, and make an incision only where it is necessary to do so; for if you cut a vein or artery and forbid yourself from your operation, then stop the bleeding with vitriol triphate or other powders which stop blood flow, and close up the wound, and leave that which rests beneath the keenness of the abscess and let the wound be softened and begin to discharge pus.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the blood is abstained.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Therefore, return to your operation until you have completed it.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And then inquire with your finger if there is any cause of the other small scrofula; therefore, cut into those and clean them.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if there is a great vein in the root of the large scrofula, then you should not cut that scrofula from its root.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	But before you let it fall by itself without causing harm.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	Then fill the wound with old cotton wool which you have already saturated in Egyptian ointment, and then treat it.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you have cut the whole scrofula, then you should grasp the two lips of the wound and suck gently until no more superfluity remains.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	But if you see that there is superfluity due to the greatness of the scrofula, then understand how to cut its root and drain it and administer the appropriate treatment and what is said.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And that of the scrofula which contain humidity, pierce it with a superficial cut where you see the site of its maturity, and make an incision so that it drains the pus to the lower parts of the body, as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And then administer a piercing, leeches with ointment and plasters to those, so that it corroses what is left of the corrosion.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And then when you see the wound already cleaned, then treat that with generative flesh ointment until it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 43.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	Of the incision of the boil of an abscess within the gullet.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	The ancients wrote about this incision in the pilhot, and we have not seen anyone in our land who has performed it.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of their language.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	But in men who have squintiness, so that the extraction of the pilhot is avoided, lest all the veins and the major nerves of the patient are cut here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	But in those who have abscesses cauterized in the mouth or gullet or two ears, when the malady is not in the cane, use the incision of the pilhot to avoid destruction which is made by piercing.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore, when we want this, let us cut the pilhot below three circles of the circles of the pilhot, or four with a small incision for width in that which is between two circles by quantity, and let the incision be in the diaphragm, not in the cartilage, and this site is appropriate for incision, for it is deprived of flesh and the vessels of blood from it are drawn out.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the patient is fearful, then let him stretch out his gullet with a hook, and then split the membrane so that he might reach the canal, but avoid the blood vessels if he sees any cause for doing so.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And then cut the ciplach according to what we have described, and it is significant about the incision of the canal by the flame from which it has issued and by the abstention of voice.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And leave the wound open for a certain time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Therefore, when the hour is reduced in which the piercing is feared, join together the two lips of the membrane of the wound and cut that only to the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And then administer medicines that cause flesh to grow within so that it may be healed.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And Al-Bucasis said that the sum of our speech which we have described is this: some of those abscesses in the gullet of the patient have been cauterized, and the patient has come to death, and his throat is constricted, and some want to cut the epiglottis so that the patient might breathe over the site of the wound by any respiration, and he is saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And therefore they commanded to leave the wound open until the malady of the malady is consumed: and its malady lasts for three days, and then they commanded to close the wound, and treat it until it is healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And what I have seen by my eyes is that one woman served a man and cut him in the gullet and made an incision on it of the pipe of the lung, and he was called to his cure, and when he opened the mouth, blood flowed from the wound just as it did from the dead, and he uncovered the wound and drew out the blood which was flowing from the wound.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Therefore, he confessed that she had not cut a vein or artery, and the wind came out from the wound, and he treated it until it was healed with fire.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And he did not accuse the servant unless he had raged in the throat, and then some days later he returned to his sickness of his own disposition.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	Now he says that there is no fear in the incision of the pilhot.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 44.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	Of the incision upon an abscess which occurs in the gullet outward, and is called a hernia of the gullet.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This hernia of the gullet is a great abscess according to the color of the body, and it occurs in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it occurs in two ways, for it is either natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in nature there is no cure for it.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental is according to two methods, of which one is like fatty nodes, and the other method is like an abscess, which is caused by a knot in an artery, and in both there is pain.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And do not place pressure on him with a needle except in the case of one that is small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you should examine him and investigate him as I have told you, and if you find it to be like a fatty node, and it is not suspended by any of the veins, then you should cut into that just as you would with nodes, and remove that along with what contains it from the skin and bursa; but if not, then you should probe throughout his body, and then treat the area with something that will promote healing until he is healed.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 45.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	Of the section of the species of nodes.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	There are many species of nodes, and I have already described all of their species in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And one should also count the difference between a node and an abscess as causing doubt.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Therefore I say that with an abscess there is heat and violent pain until the ebullition of the superfluous matter is relieved; and it is complete putrefaction when the fever, pain, and heat cease.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	But with a node there is no heat or fever or pain; instead it contains the lion's tooth which is in its own sack.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And it is according to the color of the body, and its beginning is with a lump and it is made in this way with vacua, either greater or smaller, and they are according to two species, for some are fatty and contain moisture, and the colors of moisture are many, as I described in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Therefore, when you come to the cure of a node, probe it and pierce it at its beginning with an instrument called a probe, according to its form as it will appear in the chapter which is next.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And it is the manner of inquiry into abscesses and all nodes; take this instrument and insert it into the most moist part which you find in the abscess, and twist your fingers with it little by little until you know that the instrument has penetrated the membrane.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	Then finish with your hand according to the measurement of the size of the abscess; then withdraw the probe and consider what has come out in its track.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the moisture runs out, of whatever color it may be, then you should cut into it superficially as I have said in the other abscesses.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if no moisture comes out from around the probe, then know that it is fatty.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And dry it with superficial incisions in the shape of a cross according to this form:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	thus with what you have been taught; suspend that with pins, and scrape the membrane away from all parts with ease, and guard the skin or sack, if possible, over it, and withdraw that pus along with the node.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	But if it is ruptured in the operation, it is not possible to withdraw that pus; instead do so at intervals so that no cause remains behind.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	For if any cause remains behind, little or much, the node will return according to the most.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that some small part remains behind, then complete the wound with some powdered corrosive drugs, and bind the wound tightly, and place something hot over the abscess, and cure it by another method until it is healed.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if it is a large node, then cut both lips of it and cure that with what it was incarnated.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	But if it comes with a pulsating vein, or not-pulsating, then you should cut and fill the area around it with powdered vitriol, and let that rest for two or three days until the swelling of the blood subsides; then return to cutting what is ruptured of the node.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	Of the forms of instruments necessary for incision and piercing.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Those are the forms of probes, and they are of three species; one is large, another middle-sized, and one is small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of a large probe is this:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of a medium-sized probe is this:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of a small probe is this:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	They are made of iron, of brass, and of the ends of rammed rods, so that they can be twisted in abscesses.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are the forms of the instruments; and they are named albar, and one of them is called berit.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And they are of three species, for one is large, another middle-sized, and one is small.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of a large instrument, its form is:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of a medium-sized instrument, its form is:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of a small instrument, its form is:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	It is convenient that they be used for abscesses and pustules and boil, because of which they are among the bones and from other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And they are made round, large, or pointed with large needles with which the veins are sewn; and they are made of ramie, or iron, or silver, and the needles when they are made of ramie.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And they are made the instruments of black plum, which one believes that through them they are opened up the pustules in the cavity of which are reflected; because of which they are reflected with their elevation by those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And they are of three species; one is long, another middle-sized, and the other short, according to the quantity of the width of the pustule and the stricture of it.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	The form of a large instrument of lead:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	The form of a medium-sized instrument of lead:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	The form of a small instrument of lead:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of pins are of many species; one is simple, which has only a curve, and they are of three species: large, small, and middle-sized.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And they have pointed ends, and they are of three species.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And they have pointed ends with two curves; and they are of three species.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And they have pointed ends with three curves, and they are of three species.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	The form of a simple large pin, its form is:
Forma de unci simple migier:	The form of a medium-sized simple pin;
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	The form of a small simple pin, its form is:
Forma de unci orp gran:	The form of a large pin with a curve, its form is:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	The form of a medium-sized pin with a curve, its form is:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	The form of a small pin with a curve, its form is:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	The form of a large pin with two curves, its form is:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	The form of a medium-sized pin with two curves, its form is:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	The form of a small pin with two curves, its form is:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	The form of a large pin with three curves, its form is:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	The form of a medium-sized pin with three curves, its form is:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	The form of a small pin with three curves, its form is:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the forms of scalpels with which they cut and pierce nodes and abscesses; and they are of three species, one is large, another middle-sized, and the other small.
Forma de scapel gran:	The form of a large scalpel:
Forma del scapel migier:	The form of a medium-sized scalpel;
Forma de scapel pauc:	The form of a small scalpel:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The edges of those with which incision is made are sharp, and the other edges are not sharp; but they should not be left in that way, except when it is done for the juice in the incision of a vein or nerve, and through that it heals the patient and gives rest to him a little by the drying up of the abscess.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the forms of bandages, and there are three types: large, medium, and small, as you will see.
La forma de magda gran:	The form of a large bandage:
Forma de magda migier:	Form of a medium bandage:
Forma de magda pauc:	Form of a small bandage:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	They are made of wool and only resemble the color of the skin of the patient, with which it is made.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And in its outer side, there are holes covered by the spatula, and on that side, they run to the ends, inside and out, as you wish, as you will see.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of spatulas, which are hidden between the fingers around the piercing of the abscesses and do not hurt the patient, and they are of three types: large, medium, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are their shapes:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The shapes of venesections with which the flow of blood is stopped, and they are of three types: large, medium, and small; their forms are as follows:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	They are made of yellow wax, rounded with some length, and thin.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And if these species of leeches are large, medium, and small, then it stops the flow of blood with speed when needed, and then when medicine is first applied to you.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	But do not use them to stop blood flow in every part of the body; only use them on fleshy parts, such as on the inside of the thighs and calves, and on the insides of the arms, breasts, belly, armpits, and similar fleshy parts covered with skin.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And sometimes these instruments are also made smaller, resembling skinny slices of fruit, and they stop the flow of blood when used for phlebotomy or an incision into a vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes they are made round like this:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	Of the cure of men's breasts, which are similar to those of women.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Sometimes the breasts of some men become enlarged due to a change in sleep habits when they start to grow hair, and then their breasts become swollen, resembling those of women, and they become roman-like.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when you examine that, cut it with a lunar incision from line B to line G, and then completely remove the growth, fill the wound with medicated plaster, sew together the two lips of the wound, and heal the patient.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the breast sags towards the sides and becomes soft like a woman's due to its size, then cut it in two along its sides with two lunar-shaped incisions, so that each half contains the other, as the longer line contains the shorter one, from line B to line G. Then remove the cord between the two lips of the wound, cut out the fat, and administer what we have said about sewing and powders, which are necessary in the cure, until it is healed.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not complete the incision of that which must be cut for the restlessness of the patient and the flow of blood, then fill the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive ointment and leave it until it corrodes what is rotten inside, and then cure the patient until he is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	Of piercing abscesses that come from below with itching.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	Those abscesses that come from below with itching are of the species of scrofula, hard, and they contain a bag full of pus.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And some contain moisture; and those that contain moisture should be cut with a lunar incision from line G to line B. And when all the pus is evacuated from the abscess of the scrofula, then fill it with old ointment and leave it for another day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And then the ointment should be applied and the wound should be cured with a suitable ointment until it is healed.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the abscess of the species of nodules and scrofula is, then cut it as we have said in the section on scrofula.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	But if the wound is spread so that it causes pus, then administer cauterization on it as we have said before.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	Of incisions of abscesses that happen through an artery or vein.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an artery is broken and the vein is collapsed above it, then many times there is an abscess that happens through an artery or vein: when an abscess happens through an artery, it is long drawn out into the depth of the body; and when you push on the abscess with your fingers, you feel a sound in it that indicates stridor.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And when it happens through a vein, it is round to the surface of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And incision on this abscess is dangerous and especially in that which is below the armpits, and in the groin, and in the neck, and in many parts of the body; and it is large, therefore its cure by cautery should be avoided, and especially in that which is at the extremities, or to the head, it should be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	But if it is due to inflammation of the orifice of the artery, cut an incision in the vein along its length; and then open the incision with pincers and the artery, and loosen the tunics so that they are uncovered.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And then put an awl on it and make it penetrate to the other side, and tighten the artery with a double-fold ligature in two places, which will cause you to push it out from both temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And then plug up the hole between two ligaments with a spatula so that all the blood in it is stopped, and the abscess will be dissolved.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then administer cure in which pus is engendered within so that the ligaments fall down; and then cure it with suitable ointments until it is healed.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if it is an abscess through an incision of a vein, then you should hold with your hand what is possible for the abscess over the vein, and then insert the awl below where you have held with your hand, and make it penetrate; and there will be a double ligature within so that you draw out from the other side, and then tie the abscess with a strong ligature according to what we have said to you in the ligature of two parts with two ends.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	But if you fear that drawing out the ligature, then insert the needle below all of the abscess after the incision of the first needle, and tighten your fingers in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Then dry up the abscess in its middle part where it has risen so that what is in it is pushed out, and then insert the superfluity of the vein, and leave what is inside it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then place on it powder which you have soaked in wine and oil, and then administer the cure that is made with cauterizations and ointments until it is healed.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Chapter 50 of the abscess which happens through torture of nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	As it happens in an artery and vein, and similarly, an abscess happens in nerves when they happen in their compression or happen through a superfluous strike, and similarly.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And it is done to them in the places of the joints or in the talons, or in any place where the joints are crushed.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And it is a severe pustule, and is similar in color to the rest of the body, and there are six of them on his body, and when they are pressed with force, the patient seems stunned.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And the pustule is not located in the chest area, but below the neck, and he is painful all over his body, and does not want to move forward or backward.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, for those who have the pustules in their joints, it is not necessary to use a cautery of iron, since they will soon recover on their own.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	However, if the pustule is on the head or forehead and affecting the eyes, treat it with spathum.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	But if there are few pustules, then cut them out with forceps at their roots.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is large, then open it with a scalpel, and clean out the wound; and stop the bleeding with a tourniquet, and stitch up the wound; and dress the wound so that it may heal.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 11.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	Of the section of a pustule which happens to the jaw, which happens in the belly.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	It happens to some people that they get spots on their bellies and other parts of the body, which are called warts due to their resemblance to mushrooms, whose roots are subtle but whose tops are thick; and indeed the lips of these people become withered, and it is found in those who are small, and also in those who are greatly magnified.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I have seen one like this, and on his belly were two things which were most similar to mushrooms, and there was no difference between them and white ones, except that their roots were thinner.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And indeed the lips of these people were withered and cracked, and moisture flowed from them all the time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Therefore I cut into one of them and found in its inside a stone weighing 15 ounces. And the other one weighed 6 ounces.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And when you cut into it, consider whether the patient is humid or dry, and if the color of the stone is white, humid, and of thin roots, then open it with a broad scalpel, and let it be cauterized in the fire, because much blood will flow from the wound; and if the blood flows, cauterize it.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if you see the patient is fearful and frightened, be cautious about cutting with iron; but instead take fresh lead ore, and apply it to the stone in the manner we have described; and let that sit for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	And then tighten it in the grip of the lead wire; therefore do not cease to press down on the large lump until it is cut off and falls away by itself.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	But if the stone has thick roots, then in the cutting of it there is a cause for fear and dread, especially in that which is in the belly.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	But it is possible that you can cut only half of it, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And then dress the wound so that it may heal.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And beware of cutting a stone which is of dusky color, of little feeling, and with little regard to the body, because that one is full of cancer.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And I will bring up the memory of a certain cranium.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 12.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	Of the treatment of protrusion of the navel.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	Protrusion of the navel is caused by many things; or by fissures of the diaphragm which is above the belly, and from it the membrane or intestine, depending on where the other ruptures are; or by blood which flows from a vein or artery according to what is before us, or by constriction of the intestines within it.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	But if it is by a fissure of the diaphragm and loosening of the membrane, then the color of the pustule is similar to that of the body; and there is little pain with it, and indeed it appears in various places.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it is by protrusion of the intestine, then its appearance will be as we have described, with more violent variation, and when you press it with your fingers, it hides itself, and then returns; and soon it is found again, and is greatly magnified due to bathing and violent exertion.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	But if it is by moisture, then there is little pain and it does not hide when you press it with your hand, nor is it constricted or crushed.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it is by blood, then there appear with these signs the pustule inclining towards blackness.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	But if it is by dry flesh, then it is a severe pustule, large and hard, and is fixed according to its amount.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	But if it is by intestinal protrusion, then there is little pain when touched.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And in its treatment, you should consider whether the protrusion of the navel is by blood from an artery or vein, or by intestinal protrusion; therefore it behoves you to abstain from treating it, because there is fear and dread in that one as we have taught in the chapter where we spoke about pustules from an artery and a vein.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the protrusion of the navel is by the intestine or membrane, then have the patient lean back and stand extended; and indeed touch with your fingers around the entire navel, and indeed command him to stand facing you with his chest against your chest, and indeed circle with a broad scalpel around the navel over the area which you have touched with your fingers; and indeed extend the pustule towards the upper parts with a large needle; and indeed ligate around it with strong thread or with twine in a decent manner.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And then open the middle of the extended pustule over its ligament and put your finger inside that hole and probe the intestine; and if you have blocked it or restrained it by the ligament, then indeed withdraw your fingers and push the intestine towards the interior parts of the belly.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have blocked the membrane, then take it with a needle; and cut off the superfluities of it.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	But if it is opposite your artery or vein, then surround it a lot, and then return to your operation; and take two needles and put them in those two strong threads and put the two needles around the pustule in the form of crosses, the which you make to penetrate; and then tighten the pustule into four parts over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you want, remove the needles and let the extended flesh return to its position and fall by itself; or cut into it when it is thinned out and probed, and then dress that with what we have spoken of as a poultice onto the wound until it is healed.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the protrusion of the navel is by dry flesh in it or by moisture, then indeed you should suck out the pustule as we have said and draw out the blood or moisture which you block in it, and then dress that with what covers it so that it consolidates the wound.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 13.
De curacio de cranc.	Of the treatment of a cranium.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have already said in the division of a cranium and how it is the way to its cure by medicines, and that it is cut off in it the cure by iron so that it is not ulcerated; and we have spoken of a cranium engendered in the mother and cautery of its cure.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And the ancients say that some times a cranium is found in a place where its eradication is possible, like a cranium which is on the chest or the buttock and similar to the members assigned to extract all of it, especially when it starts small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	But when it is old and severe, do not approach the patient, for I have not seen anyone heal from that illness nor do I know of anyone who has recovered from it.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation on him is that you proceed and let the patient bleed and purge black bile several times, and then cut into him, if there is found a full, manifest hernia.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	Then prepare the patient with preparation in which he is placed for operation, and then pierce the wound with nails that suit it; and then hollow out from all parts with a good saw, thorough examination within so that no cause of the disease remains.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And let the blood flow, and do not bandage it loosely, and press out the places, and wipe off the thick blood with your hand or with an instrument that is suitable to you among your instruments.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the flow of thick blood from a vein or artery gives you trouble, then cauterize that inside so that the flow of blood is stopped, and then treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .liv.	Chapter 44
De curacio de ydropici.	Of treatment for dropsy.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already recommended in the division of the species of dropsy with water, and the characteristics of each species, of its treatment with medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And that which is cured with iron is only the species of altithas alone, and it must not be approached with iron to the species of tympany nor to the species of hyparka, because it is deadly.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have treated this species of tympany with medicines and it does not respond to your treatment, then consider, because if the patient already has debility, or has another disease such as another dropsy, like one in which there is cough or chest or abdominal pain and similar diseases, then beware that you do not treat them with iron, for fear of that.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	But if you see the patient in robust health, and with no other disease but dropsy alone, and not a child or old man, then the manner of operation on him is that you elevate the patient between your hands, and then press his abdomen with your hand, filling the water to the bottom of the navel, and then take thorny ash wood according to this form:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	let it be of two pointed parts long, with a pointed end like ash wood; but let there be in it some small brevity from time to time, so that in the operation with it you do not pass into the intestines, and let him drink that.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And then consider if the generation of dropsy is from part of the intestines, because then you must with section elongate the navel from the bottom, in the right of him over the navel.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	But if the generation of dropsy is from disease of the liver, then your section must be on the left of the navel by three fingers.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if its generation is from melasma, then your section should be on the right.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And do not let your section be over the side where the patient wants to lie so that the superfluities do not flow to that place.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	Then pierce with the instrument throughout the cavity, and insert into that section, and elevate your hand with the ash wood between the cavity and the pharynx, and drain him; and if it is the quantity of a nail or more.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	Then pierce the pharynx so that the ash wood reaches the desired location, and it is where the water is.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Then withdraw him and insert an instrument of which this is the form:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	and it is like a tube of silver or gold or lead, to which in the lower end there is a small hole, and on its sides are three holes: two from one side and one from the other side; and its end is beveled according to the manner of a feather, as follows:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And at the upper end of it there is a ring, because when the instrument reaches the water, then that immediately withdraws over the instrument, therefore evacuates from the water in the middle quantity, for if you evacuate from that more than it should not in the hour, then the patient dies from resolution of his animal spirit, or he suffers five pains which are approaching death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	But it evacuates from that according to the quantity of his strength and according to what you see are the dispositions of the patient's strength, from his pulse and his goodness.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	Then withdraw the instrument and tie up the water which causes it because as soon as it is tied by the cavity, then the hole that is over the pharynx from which you have pierced that according to that manner.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	Then return the instrument on another day if he can tolerate it, and withdraw a little water, and do this for several days out of fear, and beware of error so that it does not return to the water except for a little.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	But if you fear for the patient and let out of the water a large quantity, then treat him with dry medicines so that he is healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And cauterize over the stomach, and the melasma and the liver, and also the extraction of the water according to what I have recounted in that which precedes.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter 45
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	Of the treatment for children who are born with holes not punctured in their urine places.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Sometimes some of the infants are born from their mother's womb and the tip of their genitals is not punctured (or is tightly drawn or is not in its place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Then it must be treated with piercing of it as soon as he is born with a very subtle pointed instrument according to this form:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	Then insert into the hole a thin nail of lead and ligature it, and leave it for three days or for 4 days.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when he wants to urinate, let him be urged and urinate; then return that.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not pause the lead, it is possible that the urine which goes over the place does not harm this closure.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	But that from which the hole is drawn tightly must be treated with a nail of lead, as we have said, for several days until it is enlarged.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	But those in which the hole is not in its place, because of that from which he is born and the tip is drawn out, the cause is that from them, that which is born and the tip is drawn out, there is a defect at the end of the tip of the penis so that it cannot urinate into the places inside, because it lifts up the penis with its hand to the places above; and it is not generation, so that the sperm cannot reach the mother according to rectitude, and it is a very harmful disease.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	And the manner of operation on him is that the patient be bent over his chest, and then stretch out the tip of his penis with your left hand by a vigorous pull, and insert the tip of the tube into the place of the foreskin like a feather, or you cut some part, so that the meatus comes like the tip of the penis and that the hole falls into the middle place according to what it should.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And beware that in your operation of blood flow, because many times it happens to him; and pause for him with that which you withdraw the blood, and treat the wound so that if it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter 46
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	Of whitlow which happens in the foreskin on the tip of the penis and of swelling and blackness and adhesion of the foreskin to the tip of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Many times this white swelling appears on the penis, and it is an eminence of flesh that protrudes.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And one is malignant, and the other is non-malignant.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	Non-malignant: apply a thin ointment and cut out that part within which the swelling is located entirely; then place on that wound Egyptian ointment; then the wound will be healed with an ointment of diafinicon.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the swelling is malignant, i.e., changing colour, then you should administer a cautery near its beginning and end.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	But if the swelling is on the foreskin of the head of the penis and one part of the swelling is inside the foreskin and the other part outside, then you should open the swelling which is inside at its beginning until it is consolidated; then you cure that which is outside because if you cure both parts simultaneously, there will be a risk of tearing.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And I have seen this happen to the testicles and the foreskin, turning black and rotten, so then you should cut away everything that is already discoloured or about to rot or is rotten; then you apply an ointment over it made from ground pomegranate peel mixed with flour and sifted through a sieve.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	Then heal that with another cure until it is healed.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	But if blood flows from there, then administer lunar cautery as follows:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	For cautery helps in two ways simultaneously, i.e., for the flow of blood and for the plague when it is rotten.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the penis is eaten away and destroyed entirely at once, then you should insert a lead catheter into the foreskin so that the patient urinates through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adhesion does not happen except in those whose foreskin is intact, and for whom circumcision is not performed; and when the adhesion happens due to a plague or an abscess), you should scrape with a blunt spatula until the bond is dissolved and the head of the penis is freed from every side.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to pull them apart, then you should scrape with a spatula the head of the penis and the foreskin because sometimes the foreskin, when it is thin, easily pierces through its thinness.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	Then separate between the foreskin and the head of the penis with a thin cloth which is moistened with water so that they do not adhere to each other again.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And let it be healed with a styptic ointment until it is consolidated.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter .LVII.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	Of purification of children and of the cure for those who are circumcised.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a cure for continence like other plagues; however, since it comes from our action and will, and the more so because it happens to children, we should assign to it better action and easier loss of health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Hence I say that the ancient doctors did not prescribe circumcision for any of their patients because they do not use it in their laws, and it is only that we have acquired it through experience, which is that I have found most of the artisans and butchers using to circumcise and purify with a knife and with torches; they use resin as ointment and for incision they use fingernails.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And I have prohibited all these ways and found better purification with tweezers, and ointment of resin that is used in purification with fingernails because many times the foreskin escapes upwards, since the foreskin has two layers, and the one below pulls it down and forces another incision and a sure pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And the purification which is done by apothecaries and is digital, that is used by the butchers, does not secure the incision of the end of the male member because it easily goes into its channel.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	But in the operation with fingernails, iron and corruption often cause your operation to fail.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the foreskin of a child is short by nature, and many times it happens in such a way that circumcision is not needed, and I have seen this.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	But of the purification that is done with tweezers and ointment of resin, its goodness, experience has shown me because the tweezers are according to a proportionate incision, therefore when you press your hand so that two acute angles are formed, and you insert them according to a comparison in one go; then compression of the resin is made into the shape containing the foreskin of the penis from every side without any error.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the way of the first operation is that you let the child be mostly upright if he is one of those whom I understand to be a little small, and you do not lie down but only apply the resin on his penis so that it lies within him until the next day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	Then let him rejoice in all those ways that are possible for you to receive his understanding.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	Then let him be between your hands, set up prepared, and not tremble; and conceal the tweezers in your hand or below your foot so that the child does not see those nor any of the other instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	Then insert your hand into his penis and breathe on the foreskin, and draw that out so that the head of the penis is exposed, then purify that from what is accumulated in it of dirtiness.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	Then apply the ointment on the marked place with a doubled-up piece of felt, then touch it again with your finger and insert your finger into the channel of the foreskin below with good retention, and insert between two ointments.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then lift the foreskin upwards and stretch the head of the penis; then let the blood flow a little at a time because that is better, and apply powder over it and over the powder spread cloth in which is sprinkled ground mastic in hot oil recently boiled; and apply that over it until the next day, and heal that with an ointment until it is healed.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The form of the tweezers for purification, this is their form:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	The ends of the tweezers be blunt and the other ends sharp so that the nail is not cut, and the length of both acute angles be equal to the length of two handles equally.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	But the mistake in purification is that sometimes the inner foreskin entirely escapes or is torn from the incision.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Then let you extend that from your finger with your fingernail in front of the abscess of the spot and insert it according to equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, then pull that with a needle and insert it.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	But if three days have passed and the abscess of the penis is still swollen, then you apply that which is swollen inside so that the abscess is drawn out by cautery, then scrape that with ease, and insert it as you are prepared.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And guard yourself from the head of the penis because it will not hurt him.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	Then heal that with that which the plague consolidates from the powders of which we have spoken in the treatment of powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it is cut into the foreskin over measure, and it adheres to the parts above, that does not hurt him.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	But heal that with what we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter .LVIII.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	Of the cure for urine retained in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction caused by a stone, or by congealed blood, or by a tumor, or by hernia, and it is treated in the same way as we have described for the diseases of the stomach.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not dissolved, and you see that there is retention due to a stone which has settled in the neck of the bladder, then have the patient lean forward over his knees.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	Then place the patient's feet on his back and raise his stomach from below his back, and have the assistant squeeze the patient's buttocks as hard as he can.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Then the neck of the bladder is compressed and the stone is expelled through the openings behind, so that the urine is released.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if the cause has not been dissolved as we have said before, it is vehement, then you should administer extraction with an instrument called a syringe, which has this form: It is made of silver and is slender like a cone, also with a reed of goose feather that is thin in the shape of a long needle about half a palm long, to which there is a slender tube at its tip.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the way to inject urine through it is that you take the syringe folded and insert wool or cloth into its end by good binding; and insert the ends of the syringe into the part below the goose feather, and cut away any excess with scissors from the wool, but insert it into the tube with force And then fill the syringe with egg white and honey.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And have the patient lie on his back, and pierce the bladder with it, and lubricate the wound and the instrument with olive oil and egg yolk.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	And then insert the syringe easily until it reaches the root of the wound; and then bend the instrument upwards at its tip; and then press the syringe in there until it reaches the bladder, and feel that the cause has been reached, but do not go too deep according to this order, but only as far as the meat where it turns.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And then extend the syringe with the wool little by little, for the urine sucks up the wool.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Then extract it and use the syringe to force out urine, and do not cease doing this until the bladder is empty and the patient feels relief.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter .lix.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	Of the quality of enema for the bladder with alder and similar instruments which are suitable for this.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When there is ulceration or an abscess in the bladder, or congealed blood in it, or hernia of the urinary tract, and you want to distil water and medicine into it, then use an instrument called a clampcedra, and its form is as follows:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	But at its end it is closed, so it is sealed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that there are three holes: two on one side, like a key.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	At its beginning is a hollow place, in which is what is inserted, and it should be according to the quantity that it blocks off that, without addition, so that when any cause is drawn from the humidities, it is drawn up, and when it is expelled, with that it is drawn up, and when it is expelled far, according to how the clampcedra does it, which is smeared with naphtha in the battles of the sea.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	So when you want to inject moisture into the bladder, insert the end of the clampcedra into the moisture and draw up with it that which is pushed into the parts above, because the moisture is drawn into the hollow of the clapcedra.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And then insert the end of the clapcedra into the wound as we recommended with the syringe; and then press in the moisture with what you press it in with, because that moisture goes immediately to the bladder, and the patient feels it.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	Form of a slender enema with which the bladder is enemaed, and its form is as follows:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And it should be made of silver or brass, and its tip should be like a small feather, and below there is a tube inside.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	And then take hold of the bladder with force, and put into it the moisture that you want to inject into the bladder, and then tie it tightly with a double knot, and heat that moisture over the fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And then insert the end of the enema into the wound.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And then squeeze your hand over the bladder with force and press down so that the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	But if you do not have a bladder, then take a piece of parchment and make a circle of it; and pierce that all the way around; and then insert strong thread into those holes, as though they were wound, and then add the circle just as you add the sofabes, because when you pause in that you want to inject moisture, oil and water.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And then you tie that in the instrument and do with it as you did with the bladder, and express with your hand so that the moisture reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Chapter .lx.
De extraccio de peyra.	Of extraction of stone.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already said in the division the species of stone and the cure of it with medicines, and the difference between stone generated in the kidneys and stone generated in the bladder, and their signs.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have said about the stone where there is cutting with a knife, and sectioning.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And the stone generated in the bladder properly is that which is lodged in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And they relate about it with manifest exposure and abridgment.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore I say that stone generated in the bladder mostly affects children; and its signs are that the urine which comes from the bladder is like water in thinness, and has sand in it; and the patient rubs his penis, and tries to pass it several times, and then the hole is seen.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And its cure is difficult in old people.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	But in young people it is easier because of their age.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And if the stone is large and its cure is more difficult, and if it is small, it is contrary to that.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	So when we come to the cure of that, then first cleanse the bladder with an enema which opens up all the wounds in its intestines, because sometimes that wound prohibits the expulsion of the stone through inquiry.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And then press the patient by his feet and make him cough or jump so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, or sometimes it leaves from there.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And then do that while he is lying on his back with his legs stretched out, and let the patient's arms be below his buttocks, so that the bladder is all bent down.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And then pierce it all around.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	So if you feel the stone in space, then you cut it immediately over it.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if it does not come out of there at all, then you untie with oil the end of your left little finger, if the patient is a child, or the end of the middle finger if he is an adult, and insert that into his anus.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And pierce the stone so that it comes out from below your finger.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And gradually insert it into the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	Then press on the wound you made and expel that to the outside through the opening in the bladder.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And instruct the assistant to press on the bladder with her hand; and instruct another assistant to extend the genitals upward with her right hand, and with her other hand massage the vagina which is below the genitals, at the site of the incision.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Then insert a spatulate instrument, the shape of which is as follows:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	and cut between the anus and genitals, not in the rectum itself but on the left side of the buttock; and the incision should be made across the stone and the wound in the anus, and it should be a wide external incision with a narrow internal opening depending on how much of the stone protrudes from the anus, and no more than that, for the wound around the stone inside the anus must be tightly closed once the stone is extracted.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And know that some stones are irregular in shape and have sharp edges, for which reason they can be difficult to extract.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And there are others that look like a nut, round in shape, and these are easy to extract.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	So if the stone is of this latter kind with sharp edges, press it into the fissure.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not smooth, then you should either press on it with a finger or with a tool that has been wrapped in a suitable cloth, or insert below it a slender curved instrument.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	But if you cannot press on it, then enlarge the opening a little, and if you see any bleeding, bind up that wound tightly with powdered vitriol.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	But if there are more than one stone, then at the start you should press your hand against the mouth of the bladder and gradually insert it; and then gradually press in a little, and do likewise if there are more than two stones.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if the stone is very large, then it is foolish to insert it with a large incision because this causes either death or continuous bleeding in the patient, since the tissue is not fully healed.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	But one should extract it using instruments that can grab and pull the stone out in pieces.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	So when you have completed your work, then fill the wound with aloe and dragon blood, and bind it tightly.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And place over that a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or rose oil and water, to promote healing of the wound.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	Then return the patient to bed and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when that has been loosened, wash the area with water and oil, and treat the wound with ointment of diaphenicon and ointment of diabaselicon until it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	But if there is suppuration and corrosion in the wound, and it looks like blood has congealed in the bladder and causes retention of urine (and this is recognized by the flow of blood with urine), then insert your finger into the wound and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder and cause putrefaction.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then wash the wound with sweet wine, water and salt, and apply ointment to it as often as necessary until it is healed.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And be sure during all the healing process to press both thighs and apply the remedies which are placed over the wound.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the stone is small and lodged in the shaft of the penis, and retention of urine ensues, then treat it as described below, for the troops who were treated in this way had incisions made by a punch with a cloth wrapped around it, the shape of which was as follows:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	A wedge-shaped tip, pointed, placed in the shaft.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	Then insert a needle and with it pull on the penis below the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And then insert the iron into the penis and with ease pierce through the stone with the punch.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And turn the punch with your hand on the stone little by little, and when you have made the hole through it from one side to the other, so that urine can flow through.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	Then press your hand over the opening made by the stone in the part of the penis where urine emerges, for that is constricted and blocked by the stone, and the patient will be cured.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	But if this treatment is not possible for some reason that prohibits it, then hold a needle below the stone and another needle above it.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	Then press on the stone in the penis between the two ligatures.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And then extract it.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	Then loosen the ligature and cleanse the clotted blood which has collected in the wound.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And it is not necessary to have the ligature below the stone, but only above it, for when the needle is loosened and the stone extracted, the urethra returns to its place and heals.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And for that reason when you tie the ligature above it, you should lift the urethra upward or hold it in place until the wound has healed as we have already said.
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter 161.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	On extracting stones from women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	A stone in a woman is rarely found.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	But if you do find a stone in one of them, then its treatment is difficult and prohibited by many remedies.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	The first is when the woman is very young.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second is when you do not find a woman who is willing to tell if she is married or is a prostitute.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third is when you do not find a woman skilled in this art, especially the operation with the hand.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth is that the site of the incision on a stone in a woman is distant from the location of the stone, because of a deep incision and in that fear ensues.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	But if you are compelled to do so, then take a woman skilled in this art, and she is rarely found.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	But if you are deprived of that one, then seek a woman with quick and slender fingers, or present a woman who is experienced in the nature of women, or a woman who has practiced this art from youth.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	So have that one present, and instruct her to do all that you command her to do, starting with the examination of the stone; for if the woman is a virgin, then place your finger in the vagina of it and touch the stone.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	So if you find her, cover that part below your finger, and then instruct her to pierce through it.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	But if she is not a virgin, then instruct the midwife to insert her finger in the anus of the patient and press on the stone, then place her left hand over the bladder and grip it tightly.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	So if you find her, then gradually press that part of the urethra towards the openings below by the strength of the patient's hand until it reaches the stone at the root of the vagina.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	Then pierce through it by pressing on the tip of the urethra beyond the root of the vagina from any part where it is stopped and constricting the stone below it.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the incision should be small at the beginning; and then insert the probe into that incision, and if you feel the stone, then adjust the incision according to the amount by which the stone is expected to be expelled from it.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And you should know that there are many types of stones: some are small and large, some are sharp and rough, some are long and round, and some have bumps on them.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	So you should know the type of stone in the patient so that you can understand what they want to tell you about their condition.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you see bleeding, apply crushed vitriol and hold it there for an hour until the bleeding stops, then return to your operation until the stone is expelled.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And you should prepare all of the instruments that are used in the extraction of stones from men, so that you may be assisted by them in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you see bleeding and know that the bleeding is from an artery that has been cut, then you should apply powder to the area and tighten a bandage around it, and not repeat this; leave the stone in place and do not extract it, for the patient will surely die quickly.
E aprop cura la plagua.	Then tend to the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And when the bleeding has stopped for several days and the wound is healed, then you may return to your operation until the stone is expelled.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter 62.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	On incision for inguinal hernia.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	Inguinal hernia is nothing but a collection of moisture within the white membrane that lies beneath the muscles of the abdomen and is called the fascia.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And sometimes it occurs in the lower part of the abdominal membrane, where nature has prepared it for the separation of another abdomen; and it is the membrane between the white fascia which we have mentioned earlier, and it is not anything else but fat.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the cause of this hernia is due to weakness that occurs in the muscles, because through them this material is poured out, and sometimes it occurs due to a blow made to the muscles.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this moisture has many colors; the color of it inclines towards yellow or blood-red, or red, or is black and slimy, or is water white, and that is what happens most often.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which one can tell where this collection of water occurs are these: for if it is in the white fascia which we have mentioned, then the swelling is round and declining a little towards length like the shape of an abdomen, and it appears on the muscle, because the moisture covers that entire part.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the moisture is in the lower membrane, then the swelling is round with a separation at the abdomen, and because of this one believes it to be another abdomen.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the moisture is between the membrane of the muscles and the white fascia, then it has a flat appearance.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And when you want to know the color of the moisture, then you should probe the color of the moisture in the swelling by inserting a thread into which the shape of the swelling is preceded; and according to what comes out on the thread, judge what is inside it.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	Therefore, when we come to the cure of it by iron, then we command the patient to be phlebotomized if that is possible for you, and keep the body warm.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And then let him lie on his back for some time, and place under him several folded cloths.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And then sit on the patient's left side, and command the assistant to stand on his right, who shall extend his arm above the muscles of the abdomen and towards one side of the navel.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And then take a spatulate instrument and cut the membrane of the muscles at the lower part along its length near the navel.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And the incision should be made according to a straight line equally distant from the line that divides the hair of the muscles, so as to reach the white fascia which contains it.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	Examine it, and be careful so that you do not pierce it; and your incision by which you examine it should be an inch-long cut that is suspended above the greater abdomen and scrutinize it subtly with your incision according to the amount possible for you.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	And then pierce the lower fascia of water with a large opening, and extract all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	And then separate between the two lips of the incision with forceps, and extend the fascia above them; do not touch the membrane of the muscles that contains it, and pierce the fascia in whatever way is possible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And pierce it in its totality or in portions, and especially its lateral side subtly, for if you do not scrutinize the piercing of it rigorously, there is no certainty that the water will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	But if the abdomen protrudes from that separation of its membrane in the hour of your operation, then when you have completed the incision of the fascia, return it inside, and then tie together tightly the two lips of the membrane of the muscles with a suture, and tend to it like the other wounds, until it is healed.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if the abdomen is rotten due to another disease, then command that you cut the vessels which are above the suspensory, and extract the abdomen, and then tend to it as we have said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	But if the water is collected in two places, then know that there are two hernias; therefore examine that place according to how you have done in the other similarly; and if it is a single operation, then do it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And then you should wipe away the blood, and insert into the incisions wool which has been dipped in oil or rose oil; and place over it other wool which has been dipped in wine and oil, and spread that over both muscles and the navel; and place over it folded cloths and powder, and bind those with a bandage which is according to this form:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	And then let two cloths be pressed and wrung out of wool which has been dipped in wine according to this resemblance; and let the ends be made with which it is bound by a ligature or of wet wool, and let them be attached by a bandage around the waist of the trousers, and one end be inserted into the hollow of the crotch, and the other end into the opening of the pants, and two ends over two thighs and two other ends over two ankles, and all the bandages should be tightened around the waist of the trousers.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes this hernia is artificially treated with cautery instead of an incision by iron; and it is that you take a slender cautery and pierce with it the membrane of the muscles, and it is ignited according to what we have recommended so that the white fascia which contains the water be discovered, and then you take cautery according to this form:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	and is assembled in Greek letters.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And then pierce it with that fascia, and it is ignited so that all the moisture is expelled.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	And then extend the fascia with forceps, and cut it with cautery, and pierce it with cautery which is ignited subtly; and insert that according to what is possible for you so that you eradicate all of it; and be careful that the fire does not touch the abdomen.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And know that this operation is more safe and longer in the flow of blood, and better than an operation with incision.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	But if you meet with an obstacle during the incision or during cautery, or bleeding, then command that you cure it as it meets you according to what is said.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	But if the patient is poor and does not expect a second operation due to its horror, then perform a puncture as I have recommended here; and it is when you are certain, by what we have said about the signs, that this hernia is fluid-filled.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Then you should have the patient lie on his back on a high bed, then pierce the abscess in its lowest part with a lance, and make the puncture according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And the opening should be large enough for all the fluid to flow out.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	Then place a pad on the site and apply pressure there, letting it absorb the remaining fluid.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	Then dress the wound once the ulcer is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	But if there is resistance to the flow of fluid at that time when you pierce it: and this does not happen unless the white membrane in the ulcer's orifice causes resistance and prevents the fluid from flowing out, then you should insert into the ulcer a needle or instrument with which the fluid can be extracted, the shape of which is described earlier; or apply to the pressure of the ulcer a small plug.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And you should know that the fluid will return, and it is retained for about six months or so; and when it has returned, then it should be pierced according to that same method, for the patient will continue to live.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter 63.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	Of incision on a fleshy hernia and its cure.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	Know that in the incision of this hernia there is great fear of death due to the most dangerous dispositions; and I have seen its dismissal and being saved by this better way.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And I am remembering the operation on that one, and the properties of ulcers.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, I say that ulcers are born in the parts of which the genitals are made and it is caused by many causes: either by acute sharp excess, which is distributed to the genitals, or by concussion.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And the color of the ulcer is according to the color of the body, and there is no pain in it, and it is a serious ulcer.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And when it is fresh, the ulcer is thin, whose color is dark, and there is no feeling in it.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And sometimes it is caused by a knotting of the arteries, and by inflammation of those, just as when one has perceived the memory of it; or by inflammation of veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	But that which is caused by inflammation of the arteries is known by the dispersion of the ulcer when you compress it with your fingers; and you should not touch it.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	But that which is caused by inflammation of a vein is not dispersed at all due to compression with the fingers.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that an incision can be made on this type and on the other meats; and you should insert the needle into the genitals, and then extend it to the parts above, and extract that from the white head, and loosen the suspension of the vessels, and tie them, and insert the suspension further than you loosen it from all parts of the head.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Therefore, if the head is already consolidated with those meats, then you should extract the head and insert that.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is adhesion between the head or between what is between the vessels, then you should loosen all that adhesion and insert it through a round incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	But if there is flesh growing in the place of the adhesion which is behind it, then you should insert all that is of it and extract the head as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when your operation is finished, then fill the ulcer with wool soaked in rose oil and wine; and then dress it with the other dressing until it is healed.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter 64.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	Of the cure of a hernia that is from veins.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	Veins are ulcers wrapped in some wrapper resembling swelling with softening of the testicles, and it causes difficult movement and walking for the patient.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the cure of this illness there is fear for what it is preceded by memory.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, let us discuss operation on that one according to how they do the first ones.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And I say that you should have the patient lie on his back on a high bed; then tighten the suspension of the testicles to the parts below; and then insert the needle into the genitals with your fingers at the veins which have been tested with the twig; and hold those others in position as you extend them with violent extension.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And then insert it with a pointed lance through a cross-incision in the right of the vessels, as long as the vessels are exposed.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And then cut off all parts as we have said, in extraction of artery from the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And then insert in those a needle in which there is a double thread, and apply it to the first of the places where veins occur, and apply another one afterwards to the last of them.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And then insert those in the middle place by a cross-incision according to the length of the body, and extract what is accumulated of foul and corrupt humors.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And then dress the ulcer with dressing of other ulcers in which you want to generate pus for it to fall from the vessels which darken one of two genitals; for that is not bad.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	But if veins occur in all the vessels, then the testicles should be extracted or that the testicles due to the vessels are privated of all nourishment by the incision of the vessels, and are withered; or that it is cut off from them.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter 65.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	Of the cure of intestinal hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The occurrence of this hernia is by incision that ends in the head extended over the belly from parts of the anus of the navel, for that breaking the intestines towards some of the intestines.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture is either of the head or of incision on it, and these two properties occur for many causes: either concussion, or salt, or cry, or by elevation of some heavy cause, or by similars.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	And the sign of this, when it is by extension of the head, is that it occurs little by little over a long time, and does not occur suddenly, and it is an ulcer as if the head compresses the intestine.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the sign of it is when it is by incision on the head, for at the beginning it causes vehement pain suddenly; and it is a divers ulcer below, apparently near to the head, and this is due to effusion of the intestine, and the body towards its parts below the incision of the head.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And sometimes it is burst through the intestine by the intestine; and this hernia is called intestinal hernia.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And sometimes it is caused by ventilation, and sometimes a fissure runs through the intestine, and here it is retained, and it causes great harm to the patient, and sometimes it causes bad and greater pain when it is pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the cure of the properties of this illness with iron there is fear; for that you should avoid cauterization on it.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And the manner of operation on it is that you command the patient to reduce the intestine with his hand at its parts inside the navel if he resists and then lies on his back between your hands, and then elevate his chest.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And then tighten the needle which touches the needle of the testicles to its parts below, and insert the needle of the testicles all the way through it; and then fix in two lips of the incision with hooks according as you open the incision with them.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And you shall make the incision according to the amount that you are able, so that from that space the humor may be expelled.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	Then scrape away those membranes which are beneath the skin of the testicles, while the white hard membrane of each part is exposed.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	Then you shall insert your finger into the opening of the testicle in that space between the white membrane and the next membrane, and remove with your finger the adhesions which are at the back of the testicle.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	Then hold the skin of the testicles to the sides of its openings, and stretch out the white membrane with your left hand, and lift up the testicle by the membrane at the site of the incision; and order the assistant to stretch out the testicle and you dissolve the adhesions behind it with a complete solution.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And make sure that there is no cause for the intestine to be wrapped up in the white membrane.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	But if you find a cause, then you shall cut it from below into the belly.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	Then take a needle with a large thread made of horsehair, and insert it behind the membrane which is below the skin of the testicles, at the site of the incision; then pierce the extremities which are emerging from the gallbladder, so that there are four threads, and tie some of them into a figure in the shape of a cross; and sew with that thread the membrane of which we have said is below the skin of the testicles with strong stitches of two parts.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	Then wrap the ends of the threads and sew those with a strong stitch, so that none of the vessels that surround them can send any cause through it, so that an abscess does not occur again.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And place the second stitch according to the incision of the first stitch, long from it three fingers; and these two stitches shall leave from the membrane which is below the skin of the testicles the quantity of the greatness of a finger, and pierce all the rest in accordance with its roundness, and hold the testicle out.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	Then pierce in the part below the skin of the testicles through an incision from which blood and pus flow, as we have recommended in what we have said.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	Then administer wool soaked in oil and place it on the wound; and administer the stitch which we have recommended  (and in many times the white membrane is cauterized, which we have said near the incision of it they fear a flow of blood, because sometimes this happens) and leave the stitch so that by itself it falls.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	But if the healing of it is delayed, then let it be anointed with oil and place that over it so that it falls according to what we have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	Then cure the wound with the other cure of wounds, so that it is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter 66.
De hernia ventosa.	Of a wind hernia.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia, I have not seen anyone who has been healed on the cure of it with iron.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first said that it is done thus as we have recommended in the hernia that is with wine; which is that you sew the vessels near the incision on it with ease of it; and then dry up in the middle place around the abscess with what opened it, so that the vessels fall.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And cure the wound according to what we have said so that it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter 67.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	Of the rupture which is done in the testicles.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Sometimes a rupture in the testicles as we have said, and the site emerges.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And do not let any cause of intestines occur to the testes; and if it does occur, that is few; and return back in all hours.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	But if the time with that is prolonged, then a fissure is adjusted in the membrane through which the intestine descends into the membrane; and that happens due to the extension of the membrane of the testicles as we have said, which cause is because the membrane is stretched, and then it becomes soft and the site is abscessed and emerges.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the cure of it is with cautery as it is preceded by the narration of it.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And in some times it is cured with iron thus: and the patient lies on his back between your hands, and then dry up the site of the rupture of the abscesses that emerge with an incision according to the width of three fingers.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	Then strengthen the white membrane which is below the skin so that it is exposed.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	Then take the rod and place it over the prominent site of the membrane, and press it against the bone of the belly.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	Then press the two prominent sites on the end of the rod of the membrane and adjust with the suture one of those to the other.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	Then pull out the end of the rod and do not pierce the membrane at all, nor extend the intestine, nor any other cause as you have come to know in the cure of intestinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	Then cure that with the cure of wounds, and as you pierce the threads, cleanse that and restore the wound so that it is consolidated; because the membrane is contracted and the prominence of the rupture is not adjusted.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cautery is better in this site because it is closer to health.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter 68.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	Of the softening of the skin of the testicles.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	Many times the skin of the testicles in some men is softened because the flesh which is between that is softened, and it is attributed to the guard of it.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Therefore it is necessary for that one who is asked in the cure of it to make the patient lie on his back according to his back, and to put all the skin which is softened onto the natural skin; and then adjust two lips with a stitch.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you want, cut in the beginning the superfluity of the softened skin with three or four incisions and with a firm stitch.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	Then pierce between the stitches; and then cure by the cure of the other wounds so that it is healed and the threads fall.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter 69.
De castracio.	Of castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	Know that castration in our law is excommunicated, but for the cause it is allowed to me that I remind you of it in this book; and it is not necessary to remind it unless by two ways, of which one is so that it is in the science of the doctor when he is questioned about it, so that he knows its cure if it happens; and the other way is that we many times have need of castration of other beasts for our youths by them, as with horses, oxen, pigs, and similar to beasts.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And therefore I say that castration is done in two ways: or by incising, or by piercing with an incision.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	But in that which is done by incising, the path of the operation is to let the beast bleed in water so that its testes are softened and hang down.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	Then take those with your hand so that they are resolved and do not appear below the touch.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	But in castration which is done by piercing and incision, keep the beast and press the skin of its testicles with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	Then tie the suspensory, and pierce above each wound by an incision so that two wounds are made.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	Then pierce those which you will have healed after they are healed.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not apply anything over the head of those with a headache, but rather use a subtle compress on the temples.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this method of castration is better, which is done by strangulation, for strong strangulation will leave no cause in the testes that the beast desires coitus.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	Then treat the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter 70:
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	Of the cure for hermaphroditism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphroditism in men occurs in two ways: the first is where there appears a swelling in the space between the testes, in that which is between two testes, a figure like a woman's vulva.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And sometimes urine flows from it, located in the scrotum of the testes.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	But in women it is of one kind, and that is that the clitoris on top of the vulva resembles two testes of a man, slightly swollen at the entrance like a foreskin, and has two testes.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the cure is of three kinds: two from men and one from women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And it is that you should insert those tightly packed tissues until the moisture of that thing escapes, and then cure those with the cure for other wounds.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second kind of men where urine flows from it and it is in the scrotum of the testes, there is no cure nor incision for it.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21:
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	Of a hernia and prominent flesh due to causes in women.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	A strong hernia is tightly packed over natural causes and is stressed, and sometimes it is magnified in some women to such an extent that it spreads like men, and pervades into sexual intercourse.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	So if you have the excess of hernia, hold it with your hand or a bandage and insert.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not finish the incision, especially in the vein of the artery, so that it does not cause a flow of blood.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	Then cure that with the cure for wounds until it is healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	But born flesh is flesh that grows in the womb of the mother and fills it up, and often it is protruded to the openings according to the appearance of a tail (and because of this some earlier writers called it "tailed malady"); therefore we should insert as we do with hernia, and cure that until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter 72:
De curacio de alratica.	Of the cure for anus pain.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Anus pain is when the clitoris of a woman is not pierced or has a small hole.
E es o natural o accidental.	And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental is due to a malady that has preceded it, and that is caused either by tightly packed flesh or by a subtle swelling or thickness.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	And it is caused either in the womb of the mother or her ribs or above them or below them, and it prohibits coitus and pregnancy and menstruation, and often prohibits childbirth as well.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	And the knowledge of it is gained by examination by the midwife, if the swelling is apparent, then by prodding; but if it is not apparent, then you approach that with your fingers or with a rod.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	But if the swelling is due to a subtle compress and it is protruded between the two labia, then you cut and burst that.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And you pause on both labia with your fingers, and then place your fingers indicating the two hands clenched.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the woman be on her back with her thighs extended, and then extend both labia with force so that subtle compress is broken and the swelling opened.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And then take wool and soak it in oil and place it over that spot, and keep it wet with a cloth every day so that the cut does not heal up again.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	But if the swelling is large and thick, then you should insert that with a spatulum made of wood or a twig of myrrh.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	But if the swelling is due to flesh, then suspend it with a bandage and insert that.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And let there be to you the medicines which stop the flow of blood without biting, like aha cataria, and dragon's blood, and onions, tightly bound with white of egg.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And then administer a large leaden cautery so that the wound is not healed superficially.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And keep that for several days and administer heat of lard.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	Then it should be cured with the other cure of consolidation until it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And sometimes it happens in the womb of mothers of others' children, and then you should insert according to this manner.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	But if it is due to phlegmatic humor, then let the phlegmatic humor not be counteracted by iron in any way.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter 73:
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	Of the cure for hemorrhoids and of a tail and of red botch which happens in the clitoris of women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids are an appearance of orifices of many veins from which blood flows continually from them, and when hemorrhoids are old and they are prolapsed.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And I have already mentioned in the division of those and their signs, and described them as those which received cure and those who did not receive cure.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore I say that hemorrhoids and theyls when they are in the womb of the mother and do not appear with the sense, then in those let there be no cure with iron.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	But those which are in the orifices of the mother above all senses, then those should be cured.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And you shall place the woman in a warm bath and then extend it with the fingers or with a rough cloth, and insert those with the nails.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And then sprinkle over that one of the powders which cause blood flow without biting, like a cassia and its likes.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And then pluck her feet for an hour, and then place that in cold water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the flow of blood persists, then let it be cauterized with a caustic made of sumac and grains and thorns and their likes.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And then take bran of wheat and cook that with honey and vinegar and make a plaster with it over her back.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the blood is scanty, let it be; but if not, then let it adhere with two leeches, and to the nipples its excision.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then take wool and soak it with juice of colandro or with juice of arnagloza or with juice of guara viler made with vinegar, and make it adhere to the spot; and then cure the spot with unguents until it is healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	But a hard rod which is on the surface, you shall insert that which appears to you according to what I have said in the tongue's swelling.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter 74:
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	Of accidental piercing in the womb.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Many kinds of hemorrhoids happen in the womb, like phlegmatic humor and ulcerative apostema and suppurative and gangrenous and fistulas and hemorrhoids and others' apostemas.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already mentioned these diseases and their kinds and their signs, and their cures in the division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And let him ask in this treatment of hemorrhoid cauterized which appears in the womb when it is of hemorrhoids that are prolapsed, and if you want to know in what manner its incision is made with iron.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	When you consider that the pain of the pustule in its beginning is acute with percussion and phlegm and fever, then see if there is any swelling and feel it, then do not cut into it, but treat it with what aids in maturation until the sharpness of the accidents ceases.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And then you make the woman lie on her side with two pillows; recline on her back and adjust her feet to the lowest part of the belly, let her thighs be spread out, and place her arms below her ears, and tie each one with a bandage as appropriate.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	Then the midwife stands on the right side and administers the instrument with which the opening of the womb is made, the shape of which will come in those causes that will be made appropriate.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And when you want to administer this instrument, put the tip of the mother's womb, and what goes into the instrument from the womb should not be more than the width of the mother, and lead the patient.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	But if the instrument is larger than the width of the womb, then you should put powder on the texture of the width of the womb so that the entry of any instrument into the womb is prohibited.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And you should put the thread that runs through the instrument from the top side, and let the minister have the instrument and turn the thread until the opening of the womb is open.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when the growth appears and is touched with the hand and is soft and moist, then you should dry the head of it with a broad knife.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the pus is evacuated, then you should put in the wound a poultice soaked in rose oil or green oil in which there is some astringency; and place the plaster on the section in the womb.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And place wool over the womb and on the pubic region clean wool soaked in water in which there are crushed mallows.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then it should be treated for two days with a ointment which is appropriate for that until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And sometimes the womb and the plaster are washed with water and honey, and then anointed with water in which there is crushed lily or long aristology, and then return to the ointment.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the plaster is inside the swollen womb, then you should be prohibited from treating it with iron, have that treated with what we have said in the division.
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter .lxxv.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach midwives how the living fetus should be treated when it is born according to an unnatural figure.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	It is necessary that the midwife know at the beginning the figure of the natural childbirth by its signs, and it is that when you see the woman express at the lowest parts and desire to smell the air, and about it is above her on top, and hastens the birth of the fetus, then you know that this birth is according to a natural figure, and is its ejection onto its head, and the second with it or suspended or hanging from the umbilical cord.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Therefore when you see those signs, then the belly of it should be compressed so that the fetus descends gently as it descends over its head, and the second with it or suspended or hanging from the umbilical cord, and is cleansed of those superfluities with a good cleansing.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu .i., o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	But that which is other than this birth is unnatural and blameworthy, for when the fetus exits over its feet and its body exits before its head and its feet, and its hand or to the foot of it .I., or its head and hand exits or to the belly of it, and strongly turned onto its neck, and resembling the figures of it blameworthy.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	It is therefore necessary that the midwife be wise and subtle in all those causes, and that she keep from error and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And I will show you all figures of these, and what craft is in those so that it may be signified by that and be established on that.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the fetus exits over its head by natural exertion, and that is vigorous on the woman and is a difficult birth for it, and sees the strength of it already weakened, then do that , or let the women hold it, and evaporate the heat of it with fenugreek cooked in water and with moist oils.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	Then the midwife inserts between its lips a small knife and splits with it the second with it or dries that with her finger within it until it runs that which is within it of moisture.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press the belly of the woman so that it descends the fetus.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	But if it does not descend, then let the woman be anointed with mustard and mustard with chickpeas.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And then command it, the midwife, that she be compressed and make her vomit with spice; and stop the mouth of it and its nose for one hour, for the fetus will come out immediately.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if both hands of the fetus are out at the beginning, then you should reduce those by little with ease.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	But if it does not obey the insertion, then place the woman on a pillow and lift its feet up, and then rock the pillow onto the ground; and let the woman be held so that she does not fall due to the rocking.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the hands are not bent back and the fetus is lifeless, then insert those and pull out the limb of the fetus or tie the body to the hand of it with a cloth and pull that equally, for it will come out immediately.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	Of the ejection of the fetus over its feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the fetus exits over its feet, then you should push those up and then turn the fetus a little, and then grasp one of its feet and stretch those little by little.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	But when it is inside the thighs, then you command it that it be expressed, and make it vomit with spice, for it will come out if God wills.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it is not come out with what we have recommended, then you return the fetus little by little as you place that according to a natural figure, for it will come out immediately with gentle ejection.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is prohibited by everything that we have recommended, then take mustard and dissolved gum, and beat them both in the mortar with a good beating, and apply them to the heat of the woman, to the lowest part of the belly of it.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	Then make her sweat in lukewarm water so that she acquires the phlegm.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when you see that the lowest parts of it are softened, then do to it fumigation of myrrh and stop that on it.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when you have done the fumigation for one hour, then make it sweat on a pillow, and then let it vomit and open the mouth of it, and lift from that, and press the lowest part of its belly with gentle compression, for the fetus will come out immediately.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Ejection of the fetus over its hands and arms.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the fetus exits according to this form, then you insert its arms little by little; and then let the woman be bent over her neck, and her feet down, and those rest on the bed, and close its hands.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	Then press the belly of it little by little, and then pull out what is below its feet from under the armpits so that it may be prepared in the lowest part.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	If the fester has not been forgotten, then take his feet and move them violently, and press gently on what is above the hypothalamus little by little while the patient can bear it.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	Then insert your fingers and gently open the fester little by little, and instruct the woman to express it while the fester is forgotten.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Examine the fester lengthwise with one of your fingers.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	Try to reduce it with your hand, but if you cannot reduce it, then lift the woman and make her walk.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if she cannot walk, then have her lie on her side, and strike her thighs with a violent concussion, and administer remedies which you have and count from mucilages.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if childbirth has occurred, then have her lie on her back, and study the reduction of the hand, and open the fester according to its natural shape, and make the woman sneeze and instruct him to compress himself while it is forgotten.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Examine the fester on the neck with your fingers expanded and the fascia of the patient is towards the two of his mother.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	Have the midwife hold the hand of the fester and gradually roll it, and have that facilitate it.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when it is open and how much it is, then pause over the navel of the patient what we have recommended of oil and mucilages.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And then instruct him to close his hand gradually, and when you have done that, then have her lie on one side and instruct him to be inclined on the right side, and then instruct him to be compressed; and make her sneeze with an onion.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	Exit of the fetus prepared on the side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When they are about to exit from the mother according to this manner, consider, and then you insert your second finger with your nail inside so that it is evacuated of moisture.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the fetus is suspended over the face and neck of the patient, then you insert that of the emblic, so that it is not retained and delayed.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	And then press the fetus to the insides within while you pause that according to what it covers, and instruct the woman to compress herself several times, and it will exit forgotten with easy exit if God wills it.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	Exit of twins or multiple fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Know that twins are born many times, and some give birth to three or four, but that is strange and rare; but their causes are nature, and not life.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And count those, whether they are multiples, a second one, and they are separated by a membrane, distinguish those between the ligament in the navel of each of them. And sometimes they exit forgotten like a single fetus with easy natural exit, and sometimes they exit with unforgettable exit as we have recommended.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if they are difficult some of them should give birth and arrive at what we have said about the non-natural shapes, then you treat them as we have recorded.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the midwife does what she does with ease and skill, and delay, and is formed according to the whole shape as it is prepared for birth leading to health.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Reminder of that which is formed in the womb from embryos and abortions.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Sometimes they are formed in the mother's womb one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and up to ten; and I have seen that a woman aborted six, and another ten, all formed, which cause was made by the wise measurement of the glorious doctors.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all that knowing that it should be in the science of the midwife how strong she is to that small childlike thing, and therefore pause her at that with what she covers.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter .lxxvi.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	On extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you treat the dead fetus with what we have said in the division of medicine and it is not extracted, then know that you must use cauterization with fire, then consider if the woman is of sound nature and does not have any of the accidents by which there is feared loss over her.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Then know that the woman should be laid on her side on her back, and her head inclined downward and her thighs elevated.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	And the minister should hold that of two parts or be laid on the bed so that the body of the patient does not extend due to the extraction of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	And then you moisten the mouth of the mother with oiled waters and with mucilage of alder and of fenugreek and of linseed.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	And then the midwife holds her hand with those oils and mucilages, and then inserts her hand with ease in the mother, and then close with her hand the place where the nails are in the fetus.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	And convenient places in that: then you consider if the fetus is prepared to descend over his head, and then you put the nails in the hollows of him, or in the neck, or in the mouth, or on the palate, or below the beard, or in the armpit, or in close places of the ribs, or below the hips.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	But if the descent is over the feet of him, then in the instep, or in the middle of the ribs.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And know that he has the nail with his right hand, and pause the bending of him in that place which is between the fingers of his left hand, and insert your hand with ease and put the nail in some of those places which we have said, so that it arrives at the desired cause.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And then pause and put in the opposition of him another nail, or the third if it is necessary, so that there is equal attraction, and not extension according to its straightness only.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And then it is closed at all parts, so that the exit of him is drawn back as it is done in tooth extraction.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And know in him that the extension is softened; and if any part of him is retained, then know that the midwife anoint some of his fingers with oil and insert that wisdom and turn with those what is retained.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Therefore if the part of the fetus is forgotten, then the nails are moved into place where it is pushed out; and do that so that all the fetus is forgotten.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	But if the hand is extracted in front of the other, and it is not possible to reduce that by the contraction of him, then know that cloth be wrapped over that; and then extract that so that all is forgotten, and insert that or in the joint of the hand or in the elbow.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And know that you do likewise in the other hand and in both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	But if the head of the fetus is large, or happens to him contraction in the exit, or there is water in his head tightly closed, then know that you insert between the fingers aspium spinosum and split the head and extract the water, or cut that with an instrument which is named "alundat", the shape of which comes with the shapes of other instruments in the chapter which is appropriate to this.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And do likewise if the fetus is of large head by nature: and then know that insert that with alum, or take that with forceps as we have said; and then extract the bones with the forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	If the head is drawn back and pressed against the collarbone, then the moisture in the feet should be released.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	But if it is not complicated and there is no obstruction, then you should turn the head immediately as soon as it is possible for you.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the bottom of the abdomen is swollen or fluid-filled, then pierce it so that the moisture inside can flow out.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	But if the gout is in your feet, then the attraction of it is weaker and its direction towards the mouth of the mother is weaker.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	But if it is pressed against the abdomen and the feet, then cover that area with a cloth that you have wrapped around your hand, and pierce the abdomen and the feet so that what is inside them can flow out.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	But if the other members are cut off and the head is turned, then the midwife should insert her left hand; but if the mouth of the mother is open, then insert the hand into the air sac, and surround that area with her hand, and pull it towards the mouth of the mother using those fingers, and then insert a thumb or two thumbs into it and move it around with them.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mouth of the mother is blocked by a swelling that occurs due to an ulcer, then it should not be pressed on; instead, administer the application of moist and fatty causes.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And apply poultices; and follow the patient with waters that soften and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if it is on their side, then if possible, let it be tied down; and what we have said about the live foot should be administered.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if that is not possible, then let it be cut into pieces, and extracted.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And so that no cause remains within the second part.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed all your operations, then administer what we have said about the treatment of ulcers that arise in the mother.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if bleeding occurs, then apply styptic waters and administer the other treatment.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And I have seen a woman in whose abdomen there was a dead fetus, and on that fire another pregnant one was placed, and the dead fire was the other fetus.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It happened to her after a long time that there was an ulcer in her abdomen; and it inflated so that the fire opened up, and it began to spit out flames.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And I was called upon to heal it, and I treated it for a long time, but the ulcer did not heal.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then I placed some poultices with strong attraction on it, and extracted a bone from it; and after a few days, I extracted another bone; and I was very astonished that there were bones in the abdomen.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then I thought they were the bones of the dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Then I opened up the ulcer and extracted many bones from her, and the woman remained in the same condition for a long time, recovering a little from the vomiting of flames.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And I did not think that this was strange, but rather that there is knowledge and aid in it for what the doctor does with his hand for healing.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Of the forms of instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Form of opening with which the mother is opened:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of a strainer in which the lips are curved, and to that curvature there are two virtues at both ends of the two edges.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	But this virtue should be made more subtle with a tight-fitting, and it should be made of ivory or wood.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And the thickness of each stalk is as wide as two fingers and the rim of each is as wide as one finger, and the length of each is about a hand and a half; and in the middle part of the two stalks there are two adjustment holes of those stalks which have been fastened, and their length is about a palm and a little more, and the thickness of each is as wide as two fingers, or a little more.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two additions are inserted into the mother's mouth so that it is opened by them when you rotate those two prescribed virtues.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Other form, resembling that one but more subtle and longer:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	It is made of ivory or wood according to the resemblance of forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	But at the end of it there are two additions like a comb, and the length of those additions is about a hand, and the thickness of each is two fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open the mother with them, then have the woman lie on her back with her legs hanging down, opening what is between her thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	And then open your hand with the instrument just as you do with tweezers according to the amount that you want of the opening of the mother's mouth, in such a way that the midwife does what you want her to do.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of a strainer which the ancients described:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	Form of a lever with which the fetus is pushed:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	Form of a screw with which the large head is crushed:
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is like forceps with which the teeth are placed in the end, just as you do with forceps according to this form; and some times there is a long one made just like forceps, just as you do with forceps, whose teeth are placed just like the teeth of pliers.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Form of a screw with few turns:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Form of an awl having one point:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Form of an awl having two points:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Form of forceps with which the head of the fetus is crushed:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	Form of a chisel having two edges with which the head is split:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Form of two broad chisels:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All those instruments are exercised, and when they are more polished and prepared by the artisans, then they are easier to operate and better for men because of their quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And you should not be without those instruments, for the need for them is inexcusable.
De extraccio de la segondina.	Of extraction of the afterbirth:
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the afterbirth is retained after childbirth, then command the woman to retain her urine, and then make her vomit with cold water, and if it is excreted in this way, it is good.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if not, then take a towel and pierce the covering with a hole, and place on it herbs that open the mouth of the mother, just as you do with pepper, and rue, and anise, and camomile, and aromatic plants, and cassia wood, and saintwood.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them are to be immersed in water in the towel, and place that on the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And then place a funnel of reed in the mother's mouth, and hold it so that the vapor comes to the cavity of the mother.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And then make her vomit just as we have said, and the afterbirth will come out forced with velocity.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	But if this treatment is applied and it has not been effective, then command the midwife to immerse her left hand in sesame oil or in mustard water, and then place it in the birth canal and feel for the afterbirth, and when you have found it, extract it little by little according to the degree that the mother does not suffer a violent attraction.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Before anything else, make sure the patient is moved to their right and left sides with ease.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	Then, adjust the amount of attraction, for it will obey and move away from adhesion.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mother's mouth is constricted, we have already recommended a cure with snuff and medication of the gum with herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	But if it is not cured by all the causes we have recommended, then beware that you do not tire yourself out with iteration of abstraction, but rather, whatever comes out of him to the mother' mouth, place it in the woman's lap; and then christen it with ointment and tetrapharmacon. For this will cause it to rot in a few days, and be dissolved and cured.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	But when it rots, there is bad odour that rises to the head and stomach, and this hurts the patient; and then one must administer sub-fuming and convenient remedies for this.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	But some of the Ancients have been experienced in sub-fuming with nithy-tort and dry figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	Form of instrument by which the woman is sub-fumed, for the retention of menses and secondina:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It must be made of brass or bronze.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And its subtle end is placed in the vulva, and its wide end over the fire; and the sub-fuming is placed over the embers of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And have another one ready that is consumed by that sub-fuming, and iterate another.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	Of cure of the child' anus not perforated:
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	Some infants are born and their anuses are not perforated; thus, one should gently open them up and lubricate them.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	And then, if the midwife perforates it with her finger, that is fine; but if not, perforate it with a sharp spatulum, and beware of touching the testicles.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	And then place wool soaked in wine and oil over it; and cure that with ointment until it is healed.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	But if you fear that it is obstructed, then place a cannula in there for a few days, and remove it when the child wants to defecate.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And it sometimes happens that the anus is obstructed by a clot or by pus; then one must split that clot and cure it as we have said before about the cure and the plomb.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	Of cure of fistulas that occur from there below:
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistulas that occur below in the lower part are a swollen and thick node, which occurs near the anus or in the space between one part.
E es una fistula o motas.	And it is a fistula, or several of them.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And when that node becomes old and runs with the white or yellow pus, then sometimes these fistulas penetrate.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those that penetrate are known by what comes out of them through the exit and through flatulence; and sometimes it uses the patient' exit, and often it is expelled from there as worms.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And sometimes these fistulas penetrate into the bladder, and into the urethra; and sometimes they penetrate in between the junction of the hip and into the navel.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And what is known as a penetrating fistula that penetrates into the anus and does not penetrate, is to put your finger in there, and insert a thin probe of brass or iron into the fistula when it is not painful.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	But if it is painful, then insert a subtle probe of lead or horsetail into there while you feel the probe or the hair in your finger.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel anything at all and there is no sign of defecation or worms or flatulence, then know that it is not penetrating; then go to the cure.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or urethra, then its meaning is the excretion of urine from there and prohibition of it so that medicine does not consolidate there.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	But if it is penetrating into the hip joint or into the bone and there is pain in the hip, then its sign is that the probe goes in there if in the bone it is not painful, and there is pain in the circuit of the part; and from there you see pus coming out; and when medicine does not help there, nor is it consolidated with ointment.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all penetrating fistulas there is no cure at all, and the cure of those is hard work and skill of the experienced doctors on which one must rely.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	But in that which is not penetrating and does not become old, healing with iron is expected according to what you recommend, and that which one has tried and proven.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And the patient lies on his back with his knees raised up under him, his hips bent towards his stomach, and then insert a probe of lead or brass into there if it is painful in the anus; and know the place where the probe goes through.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if he feels that around his neck, then have him lie on his side with his neck bent.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel the probe already inserted there pushing to penetrate, or else that which one feels between his finger and it swells up or hardens, then know certainly that it is penetrating; and then do not worry about it, for there is no cure for that, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	But nevertheless, some say that it is healed in some people.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And of the medicine by which it is hoped for in some people, it is that you light a subtle cautery according to the width of the fistula; and insert that heated one into there when it comes around the neck; and then iterate that two or three times until you know that all those swollen and clotted fistulas that seem like reed pipe are completely healed.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And then cure that with waters wrapped in wool over there while you have healed all those clotted meats that are healed up; and then cure it with medicines that generate and consolidate meat, and if it is healed, well; but if not, it will not be healed at any time by any other cure.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if the probe goes in there and does not penetrate into your finger which is in the anus, and between that and the probe there is a swelling or hardening of meat or swelling, and sometimes the fistula on where it touches the surface of the skin, then dry the skin from the beginning of the fistula, and you see drying by the probe; and the fistula is released and cut through.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And then cleanse those fistulas that are like reed pipe of goose feather and do not split from any cause.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	But if blood flows out between you and the probe when you insert those meats, then the milk that is and of the pus the sharp instrument cauterized with fire or with sharp medicine, for cautery with fire is good for both habits: it is hardening of those clotted meats, and abscision of the blood from the drying of the moistness.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And then cure that with waters wrapped in wool over there while the place is heated with a brazen or iron rod; and then cure the wound with ointment of hard meats that generate and consolidate.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And then medicines in which there is contraction and drying; when it is restored, then it is healed and do not fear iteration.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	But if the fistula already goes into the anus and is elongated from there on the surface of the body, then insert your finger in there and probe it.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And so if you examine and there is a membrane or flesh between you and it, and it is close to penetration, then there is no operation on him, but rather according to the way of trust and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	This condition can be treated in three ways: cauterize the wound as we have said; cut away the tissue around the cavity to make it easier for you to enter and clean the wound, but do not cut into the sac containing the testicle, and let the patient move freely so that the hernia slips back inside without his realizing it; then treat the wound with what we have described, and the patient will be quickly healed. Or lengthen the membrane and drain the pus from the cavity near the anus as we have said, either with a probe or some other sharp instrument; then clean the fistulous sores in the tissue around the anus, which you can reach by piercing through the flesh, and try to restore the entire wound with sutures. If the opening above is not healed and the fistula remains open at the base of the scrotum, and pus continues to flow from the patient,
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	Sometimes the fistula is cured in this way: when you insert a probe into the fistula, if there is an abscess on the side of the buttock, near the surface of the body and on the edge of the buttock, take a probe with a perforated tip, like a needle used to pierce ears, as follows:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	and insert it into the abscess wrapped in a piece of cloth or around that area; then insert the probe all the way into the fistula until you reach its cavity.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	But if the probe goes through the edge of the buttock near the anus, then withdraw the probe from that wound and insert your finger into the anus; then pull out the probe's tip and hold its two ends together, and tie them tightly, leaving it in place for a day or two. When you reinsert the probe into the tissue, be sure to pierce the flesh between the two ends of the probe so that they are held firmly in place.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	Then treat the wound until it is healed and closed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	But if the opening of the fistula is not pierced, then make it pierceable in some way, as long as you do not harm the testicle; then treat the wound until it is healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The shape of the spathum spine with which the fistula is split: one side is very sharp and the other side is not sharp, so that you do not pierce anything that should not be pierced, as we have said before.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	Suturing of hemorrhoids in which blood flows from the incision of those.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	There are two types of hemorrhoids: some are like warts around the anus, and others are like fat from bacon.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	They can be small or large; blood flows from them at times and they are one, and they are found outside the anus and on its edges.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	However, those that are outside the anus are according to their degree of humidity; from them flows water or a little blood with continuous pus, and they are according to the color of the flesh.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	The treatment for those inside the anus is to command the patient to sit and squeeze until the hernia slips out and the hemorrhoids appear to you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you grab and suspend them with your nails or what you have those with your fingernail, and then pierce them to their roots.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	But if the nails are not held in those due to their moisture and softness, then take them with a sharp cloth or a strip of linen or woolen cloth, and pull them out with your fingers, and then pierce them and pour some powdered alumen over them near the incision, so that they may be as cauterized; or cauterize them according to what is preceded in the chapter on cauterization.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	Then treat them with the other treatment until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the anus does not obey the ejection, then anoint the patient with ointment in which there is a little bit of bite, and let him be washed with that water which is in the anus, and let him squeeze himself so that he ejects it quickly when he squeezes.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	But if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then the cause of them is looseness, and it is that you grab them with your fingernail, or that you grab them with a nail, and pierce them, and then treat them with what we have said until they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And whoever has an incision, be sure to administer sutures for them in this way: take a piece of cloth wrapped around the probe and insert that into the needle and then pull out the hemorrhoids at their upper parts; then pierce the other end of the cloth with the needle into the root on the other side, and wrap the two ends of the cloth around the needle, lengthwise; then squeeze the hemorrhoid tightly and pull out the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And do this to all of them, and let one of them be empty and not clotted, so that the excess blood flows from it.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	Then apply to the anus a cloth soaked in rose oil or cerotum; and let him apply that to the anus and command him to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then let it remain until it comes out; and when it is healed, treat those with ointment or with another treatment until they are healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	Of the treatment for fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Many times they occur due to dryness of a fissure or due to constriction by nature.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And if they are old and not helped by that medicine, then be sure to pierce them with the tip of a spathum or with your fingernail until they become moist and let the escoria fall from above, which prevents their healing; then treat them until they are healed.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Then you pierce them with a very strong razor so that they bleed and become excoriated; then treat them until they are healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	Of the treatment for hemorrhoids, it is a key.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	Know that hemorrhoids, it is a key, and it is not unless around the anus according to the color of the body resembling the head of a nail, and it occurs all over the body and mainly in the lower parts under the feet and on the fingers, and from there you should feel pain.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And then be sure that what is in the circle of the nail is pierced and held with tweezers or nails, and pulled out from its root; then treat it.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you want, cauterize them according to what is preceded in your chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	But a wart is a small, round, sharp, fistulated eminence on the surface of the body; many times it comes to children's hands.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And its treatment is that you stretch and pierce it, or squeeze it with a needle or a hair until it comes out.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you want, cauterize it, as we have said, with fire or with sharp medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And they are eradicated lengthwise and crosswise with the instrument that I will tell you about.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	But a furuncle is a small, hairy, and fistulated tumor on the surface of the body; it occurs in the groin, and when rubbed produces a pain similar to that bitten by an ant; and it is made around the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	And its treatment is to take a needle of goose or vulture feather and pierce it strongly, and apply that to the furuncle so that it contains the circle of the needle; then turn your hand with the needle so that you pierce what is in the circuit of the furuncle, and let him hold his hand over the flesh, and pull out the furuncle from its root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, do this with a tube of silver or iron in this way:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	Let the tube's end be drawn out to thinness, not puncturing (so that it is not punctured), wrapped up so that over the said joint its appearance is smoothed and the revolution of that.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you want to cauterize the ant according to what was said above in the cauterization section of atheyl in the chapter on cauteries.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	Of the form of the instruments which are administered to give relief.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Sometimes, relief is given with silver or brass or molten lead or hammered; and sometimes the instruments are made small and large according to those who administer them, for that which is administered in the treatment of small children should be small; and of those whose buttocks are sore or painful, the relief from those should be small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of large relief and few:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The head of the tube in which the bag is tied, above it should be wide according to this manner; and there should be a distinction to it where the bag is tied like that.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the end of it further down, which is inserted into the buttock, should be closed  (so that it is not opened) very little, widening to thinness; and on one side of it there should be two holes, and on the other side one hole, and the width of the hole according to the thickness of the rays and thicker a small.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And let the bag in which there are placed medicines from the bladder of an animal or wool of a sheep, and its length be one palm.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And let it be perforated by many holes like that as it is turned around; and if the space between the holes, the thickness of the said.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And let it be inserted into those holes strong gall of strong bile which is from ten galls, or surround them with it; and adjust to it the bag; and when it is placed on him the bag, let it be tightened at the head of the relief between two distinct areas with strong constriction, and then relieve with it each hole: But the quality of relieving with it is that you fill the bag with the medicine, which is warmed according to the quantity of the tolerance of the patient; and beware that it is not too cold nor too hot.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	And let the patient be reclined on his back, and raise his legs up and place underneath him a bed on which there are already men or a bedpan; and then anoint the end of the cautery with oil or with white of egg or with mucilage of fenugreek or of similar things; and then insert that into the buttock with ease, and let the minister hold the bag and squeeze it with both hands and press with strength between them until everything that is in the relief is evacuated into the intestine; and then take out the relief and let the patient lift his legs to the wall.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine forces that out, let him hold it as much as he can; and if he sleeps with that for an entire night, it is better to wait in healthiness.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	But if you relieve that in the illnesses of soluation of belly and its outflow cuts it, then you repeat the cautery until it is healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if in the buttocks are hemorrhoids or painful bumps, then let the relief be very thin and closed, of those reliefs by which children are relieved.
De curacio de las plaguas.	Of the cure of the ulcers.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	I have already said in the division of the cure of ulcers what suited the liver, and so I say the cure of those with hand and medicines according to the completion.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore I say that ulcers are diversified according to what they are made of and according to the place on which the plaque has fallen.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes for which many times ulcers are made are thus with stone's bruising or incision of a sword or spear, or blow with a staff or arrow, or similar things to those from many causes.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	But the ulcers that are in places of the body are thus with plaque which falls on the head or neck or foot or belly or hip and similar things to those of the members.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And I am commanding the cure for some ulcers that you ponder that reflection and rule on the other ulcers.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And I will begin with simple ulcers of the head because the memory of the compounded ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Therefore I say that when it happens in the head simple plaque and there is not a fracture, then consider: if it is with bruising of stone or similar thing, and already the tendon has only been stretched and it is great plaque and you fear over that patient having hemorrhoid cauterization, then you cut and phlebolize the cephalalgia right away, and do not delay that; and draw from him blood according to the quantity of his strength if there is not any prohibitive cause of phlebotomy, especially if the blood which comes out of the plaque is little.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And let the phlebotomy be on the opposite side of the part which is plastered; and let the patient abstain from repletion and wine and thick foods.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	But if because of the minor cause any prohibition, then let him be diminished in food and not approach meat or wine.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And place on the plaque, if to him happens hemorrhoid cauterization, cut it in boiling oil only or in wine in which is dried.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	But if he is sure of hemorrhoid cauterization, then place on the plaque if it is fresh with his blood and the air has not changed that powder which I recommend then smaller.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed that, then place on it dry alkanet until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	But if the plaque is great or is with incision of a sword and similar things, and its lips are not closed by threads, then close those with suture according to what I recommend for the suture of them.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	But if the plaque is uncovered of bone and tendon, and there is not retention of it except a small suspensory, then insert that and then cure the plaque with medicines and restore the meat by cutting in the place of tendon, and command to the patient that he abstain from foods in which there is thickness: heads and formen meat and similar things to them, until it is compounded.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you find in the tendon putrefaction and it does not adhere to the bone, then you insert all that is rotted and cut that, and then cure it.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	But if in these ulcers there is artery or vein from which flow of blood can come and it is not cut off by medicines, then you clamp on the artery and if it is uncut then you insert that with spatulas, or ligate that; and if necessity compels you to do what we have said not to bring about, then cauterize until the blood is cut.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these ulcers are simple and small, then the cause of them is chilliness; so that you pulverize over those this powder because when the air changes that.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	And the manner of the powder is this: take oil of sesame seeds one part, dragon's blood two parts, and un-extinguished coagulant three parts; let all be very well pounded and sifted, and then the ulcer to be filled with that, and let it be bound with good constriction so that it adheres, and let it coagulate with the blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And then tighten that below with powder and let it be licked, and do not loosen it while this is thus because it is not cauterized, for the medicine does not pass through there until it is healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And sometimes it does this on its own, when you are not there to help and there is no dragon's blood.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And this dressing is also performed on large wounds when it is appropriate to place them on those and they are tight, and on recent wounds that have not been altered by air.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has altered them, especially in summer time, it is not advisable to apply this powder, but instead heal them with what we have already said by placing on those wounds some healing ointments, or applying on these pulses of flour from a fennel plant mixed with water and honey, which creates a poultice; and also heal them with the other cure until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	But if there is a fracture in the bone along with the wound and it is small, then you should remove it with tweezers.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And I will discuss the cure for fractured skulls where there is poisoning.
De las plaguas del col.	Of wounds in the neck.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	But if a wound occurs in the neck, then there is no difference in treatment from wounds on the head when they are simple.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	But if the nerve in the neck is cut or an artery, then if it is a nerve there should be no cauterization but rather healing with something that causes strong contraction such as vinegar and vitriolic substances similar to these because they do harm to nerves and counter the pain.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And put nothing hot on the wound because the substance of the nerves is hot and its continuation goes to the brain which is the source of all members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if it is treated with light medicines such as causing washing with tepid water, or with some vegetable juice infused in rosin oil or not, and thucia when it is washed with tepid water and the other stones are reduced according to this manner, and ointments moistened.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	But if the wound is large, then perform suturing or bring together its lips and heal it with powders until it is healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	But if there is depth to the wound or pus occurs in it from a low boil, then pierce that area in the lowest part.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	But if an artery is cut in the wound and there is bleeding, then stop it or dry it up, or ligature it, or cauterize it if necessity prompts you to do so.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the joints of the neck have been cut or all of it, and the veins in the neck are saved, then you should bring together the lips of the wound with suturing above the joint of the neck and not touch that; move it back into its natural position, and return it to its natural shape, and strengthen it with decent constriction, and let it heal for several days; and heal it with ointments in which there is contraction and excitement until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	But if the wound is made in bone with depression, then pierce that area and if there are pieces of bone in it, extract all those which you can; and let that which does not appear to be healed, heal within that area where the wound becomes pus-filled, and let the pus separate from it and its pain lessen.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the wound is fresh then powder it with that powder which was recommended to you.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	But if a fistula occurs in the wound then heal it with something whose memory will come shortly in this chapter.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Of wounds to the neck or similar when made between the shoulders and are made with a spear or arrow or lance or similar.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a blow from a lance or arrow and you see the depth of it then consider that if the wound has swelling when the patient breathes then know that the wound is deadly.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if it is not deep and the wound is fresh with its blood then you should put powder on it from the first hour and not constrict it so that the blood is not retained in its depth and returned to the heart and harm the patient, but put an attracting ointment on it and loose it two times a day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the ointment is not available to you then you should put on the wound's orifice a piece of old cloth so that it sucks what is inside from humidity; and let the patient sleep on the wound so that what is inside is expelled.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	But if three days or more have passed and the patient does not experience spasms or tremors of the heart or constriction of the soul, and sees the other good dispositions of it then know that the wound is saved; and then heal it with hot water and with the other cure until it is healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	But if its healing is delayed and all the time it remains open then know that a fistula has occurred; then heal it according to this chapter.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the wound is from a spear or arrow and it is simple on the surface of the foot or heel then heal it with that which comes before suturing if it is large, or with powder if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	But if there is depression in the bone and pieces of it are pushed in then you should twist the wound and cut to extract those pieces if they are separated.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	But if they are not separated then let them heal within that area where the wound becomes pus-filled for their extraction is lessened.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And for other accidental wounds in other members the method of cure is the method which we have said.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of wounds to the belly.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The disposition which occurs in the belly is either great, or small, or middling.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	Of the great some times see the intestine or nerve of the intestine, because it is made intrusion of them and their suturing is more violent and more subtle.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And small disruption is made difficult in another manner and it is known that their reduction is more difficult if you do not cut off the intrusion of them to their place at once because it opens and is swollen so that the insertion of it is made difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And therefore the best disruption is middling because in it the reduction of the intestine is not difficult as it is in the two aforementioned species.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And know that there are four methods of suturing the belly, but two sutures are common to other wounds in the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And two other sutures which are proper to others wounds, but nevertheless are proper only to suturing of the belly.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And I have told you everything with explanation and description.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Therefore say that when the wound is small and there is some cause from the intestine through it and it is made difficult to reduce it then it is in one of two ways: or by smallness of the disruption as we have said, or when to the intestine is given inflammation by cold air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And therefore when it is thus then you should warm that in such a way that you soak a sponge or cloth moistened with tepid water only by itself, or that you gather in squinant water, and cyperum, and spic, and embrocations on the intestine until the inflammation is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And sometimes it does this with the quality that has contraction and is better than water alone in resolving inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And therefore when you see inflammation resolved then you should moisten the intestine with water in which is mixed alder and mallows because by this it is eased the insertion of it with little cause.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	But if it is necessary to withdraw his bowels for this treatment, then cut the rupture with a small instrument with which you can incise hemorrhoids.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And the first treatment is better when it is not cutting, and there is no occupation in stopping the bleeding by necessity and deflation.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	As for the instrument, look at its shape:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One side of it is bent and acute, and the other side not acute, and its end thin, and not with the thinness of a spatula, rather it should be blunt a little.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And when the wound is enlarged and the intestine comes out, then its reduction should be according to its natural shape in its proper place, if it is possible on that, for it is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	But when the rupture is wide and it is in the lower part of the belly, then you should make the patient lie on his back, and put his legs above; and if it is in the upper part of the belly, then you put his head and chest above the parts below.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And likewise if the rupture is in one of the two parts of the belly, then pay your intention and attention to that so that the part where the wound is is higher than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And thus you should administer this for large wounds and small wounds.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And for small wounds, put on what is prepared for you, and let the minister hold it between his fingers, who has the wound all in his hand and hold the lips of it, and appropriately uncover from that to that which sews the suture any cause or other.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	And this is the manner of common suture: one which you take the needle, or count of needle according to the quantity of the amplitude of the wound; and let go from the end of the rupture of the little finger, and tighten the needle one, another that you do not put thread in both ends of the cord, with two ends of the tape that is under the cord of the parts inside, as you make her penetrate from that part; and you have already added two ends of the cord and two ends of the tape, and so are made four orders.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And let go with double thread around the needle, and some times of two parts together, and let us add both lips and the wound by decent addition; and let go the thickness of the little finger and take another needle in that, and tie that with thread thus as it is with the first needle; and do not cease to do this if it is necessary with needles until you have completed all the contraction of the wound.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And let the needles be smaller between thickness and thinness, for the thin needles enter the flesh lightly; and the thick ones are of difficult use in the cord, and therefore let them be smaller in thinness and thickness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And let the needle not be put in two ends of the cord next to it, for fear that the flesh is lightly inscribed and that the wound opens before its consolidation.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And let them not be prolonged in suture so that the wound is prohibited from consolidation.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And let the ends of the needles be inscribed so that they do not irritate the patient during his sleep; and put over the suture powdered expandants from all parts, which have the ends of the needles; and take them away when you know that the wound is consolidated.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	And this kind of suture with needles in what way is more convenient for small wounds, for it reaches in the suture of them one needle or two or around them.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	But the second suture is common: and it is that you administer with suture the four ends, of the cord and two ends of the tape, in one go, with a needle in which there is thread wrapped both in thinness and thickness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And let when with the needle you have penetrated these four ends, reduce the needle from that meted part of which you began, so that the thread drawn box the more superficial part to the wound, so that the suture is according to a cloth stitch by which the cloths are tightened.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And put between each suture the quantity of the thickness of the little finger.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this suture know men.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And with this suture I healed the wound which was inflicted on a man in his belly, for he had been stabbed with an arrow, and it was a rupture of two fingers width, and it had exited the intestines around two inches from the intestine of the middle place, and it was a rupture in the middle of the leg; and then I reduced it after the intestine had exited the wound for 24 hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the wound was consolidated in the space of 15 days or around, and I healed him, and he stayed for a long time, and is conversed in his dispositions.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And the other physicians had judged that he would not be healed; and by miracle he was cured, for I did not heal him with ointment, but put on the wound cotton wool two times a day and frequent washing with honey water until he was healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	But I will say two kinds of proper suture according to the narrative of Word.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And it is that you begin with the suture of the cord, and interlace the needle from the outer part to the inner part.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And so when the needle penetrates in the cord and in that you have made holes according to rectitude and length of all the body, and let go the end of the tape in which you have put the needle; and make it penetrate from the other end the needle from the inner part to the outer part in the other end of the mihat.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And so when you have made it penetrate, then let us make it penetrate another time in that meted end of the mihat from the outer part to the inner part; and let go the end of the tape which is on this side, and make the needle penetrate in the other end of the inner part to the outer part.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And make it penetrate with that your penetration with which you make it penetrate in the tape in the end of the mihat, which is in the party of him, so that everything penetrates.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And let us begin from this meted side, and draw that with the end which is of the tape on the other side, and take out the needle from the cord which penetrates, and let us reduce it in that cord and press the end of the tape which is on the other side with this end of the mihat; and draw that from the cord which is of the part of him.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And do this one and another, and do one again and then another until you sew all that is out according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the sum of this manner of suture is that you sew with the suture of skin with which you sew the skin, indeed that you sew the tape one time from the end of the cord, and let us take that other time so that you finish it.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	But the second kind of proper suture which I say is called Gualia, and it is of the bowels of him and by him wound, is that you sew that according to similitude with which I have mentioned medicine sews that, indeed that you add all parts to their proper comparison to him conveniently by nature; and apply one end of him to another end of the mihat and that is done according to that I have to you.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	Place the needle at the end of your sight, near the edge of the wound, and make it penetrate inside to the depth of that sun, and touch the two ends of the cicatrix; then turn the needle and make it penetrate from outside to inside on both ends of the cicatrix.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	Then turn those scars, and make some of them penetrate from the inside to the outside on both ends of the wound that is in the opposite side.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this way of suturing is better than common suturing, and it is the suturing from which I derive my memory.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the speech of Gallia
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And some say that stomach suturing is done with two needles; you should insert a needle in each of these and start with the needle nearest to you, and make it penetrate into the other side according to the suturing of those who cut up bodies along the middle.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And know that when there is disruption in the middle part of the belly, then its suturing is more difficult than that of other parts of the belly.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	But the judgment of medicine for plague is a judgment of the other plagues.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	And its cause is that when you find the plague new with its blood before the air alters it, and you return the intestine and cook it and prepare it decently, then place upon it a carnative powder.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the plague, then place upon it some unguents which are at your disposal inside so that they make a hard stone and enclose the puss, and are consolidated cicatrix and wound; then heal it just as is the healing of the other plagues until it is healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	But if you do not have the medicines at hand, then place upon it immediately, as soon as it begins to suppurate blood and pus, change it twice a day, morning and evening, according as you are taught, until it is healed; for you should not use other medicine in different dispositions when the plagues are simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	But if you fear that the plague will communicate to the principal members, then take lamb's wool and soak it in oiled quality or in oiled rosewater, and place it around the places which are between the angles and under the heels.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if he feels pain or putrefaction in his intestines, how many times this happens, then anoint that with black styptic wine of Tebes, and especially if the putrefaction is produced in the intestine and there is an exit opening into its cavity.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And know that that which is of the gross intestine is easier to heal than that which is in the subtle intestines.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And it is of difficult healing when the intestine which is called "gut" does not receive healing of plague that boxes in it from all sides; and this is because of the great multitude of veins that are in it and because of the magnitude of it that are in those, and because of the subtlety of the body of that, and because of proximity of that to nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	But if what proceeds from the plague is the tissue, and you obtain that recently, reduce it according to your rectitude with which you reduce the intestines similarly.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	But if it has passed into space and is already made black or dark, then you should constrict that with puss on the place that is blackened by it, so that there comes a flow of blood from the tissue in which there are veins and arteries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	Then insert that which is another that, and place the two ends of the puss pendent from the edge below the plague opening it, so that upon you is alleviated the attraction of it because of the descent of the tissue and emission of blood of the plague.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Memory of the plagues when they happen in the intestine.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When disruption happens in the intestine and it is small, then it is possible that it be restored in some people; therefore, because he had the plague in his belly with a lance-wound and the plague was on the right part of the stomach, and the plague was old and made fistula, and he passed gas and ventosity from it.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Then he followed the healing of it even though he was not confident in its healing, but he continued to sutilize that until it was healed and the place was consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And he put that which he saw the place already consolidated, he waited on the patient in whose belly he had received harm because of an accident of evil; and he did not receive any harm from that evil accident, and remained in his many dispositions eating and drinking, and he went into bath and was exercised in his limbs.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And some experienced people have said that when plague happens in the intestine and it is small, then it should be bound according to this way: and it is that you take herbs of great heads; then tie the two lips of the plague and place one of those herbs which has an open mouth over the two lips of the plague; then when he takes on those and tightens his mouth, cut off the head of it, for it will adhere and not be dissolved.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	Then place another worm near the first one, and do not cease doing this with worms one after another according to the quantity of all the plague.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	Then return that and cook the plague; and let those heads attach in the intestine until the intestine is healed; and no harm will happen to the patient.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the intestine be bound with a subtle puss which is made from the intestine of beast added to it, because it is more in needle; and it is that you take the end of those intestines of intestine and make much of it naked, and then bind the end of it with puss of it, wrapped, and then insert that needle and cook with that the intestine, and reduce that into the disruption.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this way of suturing with worms is nothing but according to way of confidence and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	But if the plague is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the subtle intestines, for then it is nothing but subtilization, and not healing of it completely.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	Of healing of ulcer and fistula.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	Know that any plague and apostema when it becomes soft and old, and is made ulcer, and not consolidated and suppurates, then, in whatever member it is, universally is named fistula and we call that as "sucker."
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And fistula according to truth is knotted phlegm, hard, white with which there is no pain and to which is cavity just as is cavity of bone of donkey; and because of that it is named  "rizat", that is bone.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And it is in some people moist, which suppurates blood; and strongly its moisture is discharged in some hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And sometimes this moisture is thick, and it is little, and it is gross, and it is subtle.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And I have already given the division, then when I say the plagues, that any ulcer which is not healed and it is not naked flesh, it is not anything but by one of these causes: of which one is or because of lack of blood in the body; or because of wickedness of it; or because between it and its lips there is hard flesh preventing generation of flesh; or because it is of thick phlegm; or because that ulcer inside meets is rotten and the matter that is in it is of bad quality; or because medicine is inconvenient for its healing; or when corruption happens in the region, and pestilence is tardy in that healing of apostema because of nature; or because there is bone, or many bones.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	Now I have shown all of those causes, their signs, and their cure by medicine in the division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And now so that you know the cure for a fistula which is caused through an operation with the hand.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And know that fistulas occur in all the body's parts; some of those are fistulas that affect the large veins and arteries, or nerves, or brain, or intestine, or bladder, or any of the ribs, or one of the vertebrae of the spine, or any of the compound joints consisting of bone and skin. And there are others that occur near the main body part they resemble.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And therefore those of these fistulas that follow this manner are illnesses of difficult cure, and do not receive treatment, and occupation with them is labor and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if it is one of the fistulas whose depth does not reach these places I have mentioned, and you expect and believe in its cure, and wish to attain knowledge of it, then take a probe made of iron or steel, and if the fistula goes straight, then probe it with this.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	But if the fistula is winding, then investigate it with a probe made of thin lead, for lead, by virtue of its light body, is drawn and bent according to the windings.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula has horrific movements, then it is not for you to give a sign of it with a probe.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Therefore, christen the opening for its openings, for the moisture by which you cleanse that will go through the other openings and flow out of them.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And then inquire closely according to the manner in which it is possible for you to know whether here there are bones or nerves, and whether the fistula' s cavity is distant or near, or whether it is a fistula whose openings are all at one end, and it is according to your entire strength that you probe the patient, and the discovery of pain according to your compression with your hand over the area, and similar to the signs and the accidental causes of the apostema.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have stood over all these causes with true standing, then come to the cure according to confidence: and it is that you consider whether the fistula is apparently near or in a salty place, distant from a joint, or of a nerve, or of an artery, or of a vein, or of one of those places which I have told you about.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then you dry up the fistula according to what has been said before about its narrative, and stop up that which is in that filtration and of rotten flesh, and that which is born in the opening of the flesh, or of thinness and of similar, and cure that within which is healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	But if the fistula is of distant depth and is straight, then know that you must insert that into the cavity of the fistula, which you have understood with iron, as far as it is possible for you to go, and then cleanse that of all its rotten flesh; and then administer hot waters wrapped in sharp medicines, and insert those into the cavity of the fistula.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And do that with it several times until the sharp medicine corrodes all that is rotten in the cavity of the fistula.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	Then restore that with ointments which bring about healthy flesh within that is healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	But if it is not healed by that, then you cauterize that according to what we have recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	But if the cause of the fistula is bone and that is certified by you, then you probe and dry up that according to what we have recommended, unless you forbid any cause of vein or nerve or main body part as we have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is uncovered and there is corruption and blackness in it, then you remove that all the way until the corruption is entirely stopped up; and then cure that with what causes flesh within to be healed.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it is not healed and the arm hangs as before, then know that you have not attained to the total eradication of the corruption; then uncover it again and do the reason for it and cleanse it with your greatest strength, and then restore that.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And therefore if it is healed, then that is good; and if not, then know that the corruption is in the distant depth of the body, which has not been reached, and then you have nothing to do with that but to leave it alone.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the rotten bone is small, or it is possible for you to pull it out, then you pull it out with thin forceps which are suitable for that.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if there are many bones, then you make the extraction of all those with your greatest strength and do not leave any cause behind.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	But if you encounter any counteraction by the moisture, and in their incision there is no fear or mistake, then insert those with laments or flesh if they are here, and loosen the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	But if you are not prepared to stop up the bones at that time, then pause over the wound what will poultice it, and leave that until the pulp is at the environment of those bones of flesh and of laments, and guard the wound so it is not consolidated but restricted by the incision which you have made in your operation.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	Have you, if you fear, pause over it a cloth drenched in oil or a cloth drenched in Egyptian ointment, or one of the green ointments; for when those laments will rot and the bones are separated from that ablation and that attraction is eased.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	But if it is a great bone like the bone of the arm or of the thigh or similar to those, and that which is rotten in it is its fascia only, then remove that with resin only behind so that the blackness and corruption are stopped up, and then restore the wound.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	But if that which is rotten in it is a great part and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then the necessary cause is to close that and to cut that all the way into the area where the corruption has been reached, and then cure that within so that it is consolidated.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I have told you that you should ask from one man in his thigh so that he will offer aid and assistance to your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	A young man about thirty years of age to whom joint pain occurred in his head and the mucous membrane inside is swollen into the matter within the head where the matter has reached the head, and it is matter of apostema with great apostema and there was not to him an extrinsic cause.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And then the time was prolonged by that because of the mistake of the doctors until the apostema was opened, and there occurred in him many openings through which all the humors of the body flowed out, and his cure was then stopped up so that the thigh was fistulated, and there were in him horrific openings through which all the fluids of the body flowed out.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And then he was treated by many doctors for about two years, and there was not in those the wisdom of the bone within the joint where he had been called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And they saw his thigh and the matters flowing out of it from those openings because of the great body; and indeed that man' s body was entirely swollen and his color was yellowish.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then they inserted a probe into one of those openings and reached the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And then they probed all the openings and found that they came from all parts of the thigh.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then they cut and inserted into one of those openings where I discovered a part of the bone, and I found it rotten, and indeed it was earthy and rotten and blackened; and there was already a part of the thigh rotted where it had penetrated within the membrane.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then I tied what was uncovered and prepared of the exposed bones.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And I saw that it was not in the bone, but that corruption which had separated and I tied off, and which I had already cut away.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	Then I applied the restoration of the wound with consolidative medicine for a long time, but it did not consolidate.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And then I tied and uncovered the bone again upon the first uncovering, and found continued corruption in the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And I tied that which appeared to me of that corruption, and then I saw it was fitting to do the cure and restoration of him, and he was not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then I uncovered him another way and did not cease to pierce the small bone little by little particularly and perfumed his restoration, and he was not restored until I had pierced around one palm of him, and that which I extracted with its marrow, and then I restored that with medicines, and it consolidated slightly and healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And it was not necessary to iterate the operation upon him or his sectioning except by the disposition of his sickness and by the lack of his tolerance and fear of death, for he became lethargic at all hours due to excess evacuation.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And therefore he is healed by whole healing, and nothing is in the place of bone or hard flesh; and his disposition in his body has returned to its virtue, and his dispositions are converted and no contrariness was made to him in walking nor harm in any cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	But if the bone is prominent in the place of the body having been pulled out, then know that you should section it secondly in this manner: and take linen and tie that at the extremity of that prominent bone, and command someone to extend that in his hand; and pause that linen of woolen thread over the flesh which is below the bone, and extend its extremity so as to pull the flesh back to the parts below, and you uncover the flesh over the place where you wish to cut so that the saw does not cut the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And pause a post or table below the bone properly, for when you do that it is not prohibited that the saw does not cut the corrupted flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And know that the sawing is upon the corrupted place little by little, for if it is in the concavity of the bone and corruption does not appear in its appearance to the sense, then force its cutting another way.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is corrupted but not prominent, before it is one party continued with another, and the corruption is in its middle or in a part of it, then you uncover the flesh from all parts entirely; and then pause a post below, and saw that from the first party where the corruption is while the sawing continues through the other party.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And let the sawing be according to the place of the corruption a little, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is in the joint, enter that corrupted joint and saw the bone where it continues from the other part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then there is not reason in him but foolishness.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the palm of the hand or the foot, it is very difficult; however, know that you inquire into the corruption in whatever manner it appears to you, and that you open that, and cut it according to any disposition which is possible for you, and with whatever foolishness is rectified for you, when it does not make a contrariness vein or nerve.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And know that the saws and the saws for cutting these bones are very according to the situation of those bones, and their preparation, and their thickness, and their subtlety and greatness and smallness, and their hardness and rarity; so that when you prepare for any kind of operation, convenient instrument for that operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And know that that operation signifies for you on the kind of instrument of which you are in need; when with you is great study and length and knowledge of the manners of this art, and testimony of manners of illnesses, for then you have by your parents that which is convenient to him of the instruments to every illness.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And I shall tell you at the end of this chapter the number of the instruments which you will use with simples by which you will proceed to your prohibition, which you will experience on the others.
Forma de serra:	Form of saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of other saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of other saw:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Form of another great saw:
Forma de ray:	Form of file:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	Let the head of this file be according to the form of a key star, and its points according to the form of the points of the saw.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And it does not behoove that with that are rubbed the heads of the joints when they are corrupted, or is the great mouth wide.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Form of a larger razor than the others:
Forma de razori menor:	Form of smaller razor:
Forma de razori lat:	Form of broad razor:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Form of another saw properly made: let it be made bow-shaped on the upper part and the acuity of it of iron, and its member of a boy's dagger properly made.
Forma de lu:	Its form:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Form of razor in which it has a concavity:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Form of other subtle razor:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Form of other razor with a curved extremity:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Form of small razor resembling a tent:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Form of incisor by which bones are cut:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Form of other smaller incisor:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Form of another incisor; this resembling a file, and its extremity is like a saw, and it is used in many places in the reason of bones:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Form of file which befits the piercing of bones:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And its extremity is triangular and of acute extremity.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	And it is made of Indian iron, and similarly know that all the causes that we have said of saws and of incisers and of saws.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	Of incising extremities and of the sawing of bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The extremities become pus or by an intrinsic cause or by an external cause, or when you have medicated that corruption by cure of those medicines and the cure does not correspond, or sometimes the corruption goes down from the member where there was no cutting cause, then know that you incise that member where the corruption is located, for that the patient escapes by death or by malice which is the greater defect of the member.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the sign of that to which it happens is that·the member is made black as if it were burned by fire, or it becomes pus properly the blackness within as the swelling, and therefore cut off from that.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And similarly if it is a cause of the corruption by shock of some poisonous causes as of scorpion sea or of adder or of centipede or of scorpions, then cut off from that.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or the shock is in the extremity of the finger, then you incise the finger and do not give space to the corruption for that it goes into the hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And similarly if you access the hand, then you incise that of the knuckle of the fire-bone, and do not give space to the corruption for that it goes into the arm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if instead you incise the arm within at the elbow in the joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if another goes through and turns around the elbow, then in that is the death of the patient; and another cause another cure quantity of virtue.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And similarly do the foot when corruption comes through the finger of the foot, then you incise that within at one of the toes.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if it affects the shoulder, then cut into the entire shoulder.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	But if it can be seen in the groin, then cut into the groin up to the joint of the hip.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if the corruption has already reached the hip, then in this case there is no cure but to release the patient and let him die.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	And the way of cutting or binding the joint is to tighten the ligament at the part lowest down, which you want to cut, and tighten another ligament over it; and extend a ligament to the parts below, and extend the other one above; and separate the flesh which is between two ligaments so that all the flesh might be exposed, and then let it be cut or bound.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And whatever is placed on top of the wound must not touch the wound itself but be applied with a dressing and bandage tightly so that there might come to the patient a wound healed and clean.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	But if there is bleeding from the wound, then cauterize it or place some powders upon it which stop the flow of blood; and return to your medicine until it is complete.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And bind the wounded member with a ligature in whatever way you consider appropriate, and care for it until it is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And I remind you to do what happened to a man on his foot, this accident which I and you recorded; the man got blackness in his foot from burning which was like fire.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that corruption began in his toe so that it affected his whole foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that man prepared for himself remedies before the cure went to the member in its intensity of pain and burning; he cauterized that foot up to the joint, and it was healed.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	That man had been suffering from that disease in his hand's toe for a long time.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then he came to me, and so I made him remove that excess by what I applied to his hand with remedies; and the cleansing of his body was not successful, and the excess did not cease but began to go into the other toe as it had begun in the hand.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And he implored me to cut his hand, and I did not want to do that hoping for the removal of that excess, but fearing the cutting of his hand because the strength of the patient was over his body.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And when he despaired of me, he returned to his own land and got there that man who prepared and cut off his entire hand, and it was healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I have not added this narrative except so that it might be an helper for those who suffer from this disease and a sign by which it might be recognized and understood.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	Of the cure of wounds and the quality of blistering with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When there is an abscess on some fleshy part and the space of the abscess is prolonged so that it makes a collection of pus, and then it is broken and opened up, and the pus is discharged, and the wound is left hollow as if it were a vessel, and the membrane which is above it like a thin membrane, and there has not been any subsequent corruption and it does not impress upon the bone or nerve or ligament, it is called a sinus, and is not named fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	But if the space is prolonged so that corruption inflicts upon some part, then it is called a fistula and not a sinus.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And the cure of it is that you cut away that membrane entirely as it is turned over, and especially when it is thinned out and made with a dressing, and cauteries so that they do not adhere to the wound by their corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	But if you hope that the membrane adheres and that the corruption has not achieved through subsequent consequence, and when there is swelling in the face, then you cure it with blistering.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And it is to be considered a sinus; and if it is great, and the arm which you hold is of fetid odour, then blister that with Egyptian medicine which is of oil and sour wine and rosemary received in equal parts, and let them be boiled in a vessel over the fire until they are reduced to the consistency of honey.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And then take from it what is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; and blister with that the sinus and tighten up its opening, and leave the medicine in it for about two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And then take that out with caution; and do this for several days until the sinus is cleansed and the swelling reduced.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And sometimes it is blistered with ash water when that medicine is not present to you; and take ashes of wood and put over them water, and then strain those ashes and blister that with the liquid so that you believe that the sinus is now healed.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the patient has no tolerance for Egyptian medicine nor ash water, then blister that with water and honey and crushed rosemary which is mixed together, and blister it with wine and honey mixed, because of the property of honey to cleanse and wash away; and wine makes the sinus adhere, especially when there is excess of astringency and dryness.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you do this several times and you believe that the sinus is reduced, then blister that with what makes the flesh grow in it.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And take some thin ointment and dissolve it in rose oil and astringent wine, or blister that with some other medicines and ointments which have the properties which I have written about in the treatment of ointments.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the opening of the sinus is narrow and the tube of the blister does not go into it, then widen that opening with a small iron tool little by little, and put in it cotton wool wrapped in Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment so that it is widened.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And likewise if the opening is wide, then you join together its lips with a stitch and leave in it as much as will go into that opening when you insert the blister.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the opening through which the arm runs is raised above the parts below, then dry that in the hollow place where the arm runs into it from below, because when the arm is contracted in the depth of a sinus the flesh is generated in it there.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it is not possible for you to dry the sinus within the hollow of the bone according to what you want, then you will be forced to prepare the member with preparation so that the arm runs through it more freely and there is not retained in it any cause of the arm.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And take medicines which are binding and put them on the sinus conveniently so that they might extend those onto the dressings.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And the dress be of such great quantity so that it makes communication throughout the sinus; and then cut with forceps on either side of the opening of the sinus a wound more ample than the opening of the sinus, and then extend over another dressing of leons according to the amount of the wound, and leave it over that in a distant position from the opening of the sinus so that the discharge of the arm is far away from it and does not touch the dress, unless for some days once a day.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	But that which is on the opening of the sinus, which is reduced in all hour because it drains what is restrained in the arm.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And so that you may know whether what runs from the arm is pus or little, or is digested, or is not digested.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And also you consider the location of that sinus, if the patient feels pain in it or not, and if there is an abscess in it.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And when your treatment is prolonged in such a way, and you see the matter that exudes through the orifice of the sinus already adherent, or if it is not adherent, then on the third day, you remove the poultice, and when you remove the wound, change the dressing with another one and renew the ointment.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	But if a subtle humor flows from the sinus for a long space of time, then do not despair of its adhesion, because its healing occurs on its own, because there are some people in whom generation of flesh occurs on their poultices, and of others in which the opposite happens to them.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if a bad humor flows from the sinus for several days, then know that the sinus is not adherent; and if the adhesion of the sinus is delayed and its cause prolonged, then you adjust to the dried-out medicines, and if the medicines are wet in their substance and in their virtue, they are dried as with ointment of thin honey, when excess is added to it.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the best remedy for which is used is to take ointment of thin honey and dissolve it in rose oil, and use it on that, and apply it to that.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And in that action, when there is no heat, take ointment of thin honey, and when it is within, gross it up, and use it; or take myrrh and aloe, and pound both together and pulverize them over the honey which is over the fire, and line that over a poultice and tighten that over the sinus; and line that with the honey which you have thickened within, and pulverize it over a poultice and tighten that.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And some times you administer with it long pepper and roots of celestial lily (and is the celestial lily) and bran of oats and centaury, and use of those simples or adjust, pound those and sift them and pulverize them over the honey which I have recommended; and use that.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the sinus is prolonged and not healed by this treatment, then know that the corruption is in its depth, and it already makes inquiry into the bones or into the other hard members or to the tendons; then you treat it with a fistular treatment, as above it is said.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	Of the treatment of panaric and nail worn away and addition of incision of finger and section.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Panaric is an abscess which occurs below the nail of the toe of the hand or foot, and rarely in the other fingers, and when it is prolonged and its healing is less valued, or it is an abscess from cauterization, or it is corrupted, and a bad humor flows within that corrodes the roots of the nail, and it very much corrupts that entirely, and its corruption very much permeates to the bone within which has a fetid odor, and the extremity of the finger is made lame, and its color is made dusky.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And therefore when you will have that with which we have said in the division and do not confer your treatment, then know that you pierce with iron all the superfluity which is rotted from the nail and properly cauterize the wound, because cautery is beneficial in that.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is healthy and the nail is healed, and the additions of the nail already compress the flesh at the partitions of the fingers, and begin to sting it and hurt that, then know that you stop with a sharp needle under the angle of the nail which pricks the flesh, and drive that up and insert that flesh with ease, and apply to that which flows from the flesh of the corrosive medicines within that is all cleansed; and treat that with ointments until it is healed.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	But if the corruption already penetrates into the bone, then know that you pierce that bone and extract it, because at no time will it be healed when the bone is corrupted.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you see the corrosion and corruption going into the finger, then you insert that in one of the nuts according to how it is premised by its remembrance, and treat that until it is healed.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	But if there is concussion or attrition to the nail, and therefore in that there is violent pain, then know that you at first flebotomize the patient, and properly dry the nail with a sharp spatula by making a transverse section above it, and beware that the section does not permeate into the flesh which is below the nail, because you will cause violent pain to the patient, and a cause of generation of superfluous flesh in the location; and treat that location with that which allays pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	But a finger jointed, which is born in the hands of some men, very rarely has bones, or very rarely is it in the nail.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And some are born in the root of the joint, or its generation is in some nuts of the fingers.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	But that which is born in some nuts of the finger does not harm, and that which is born in the joints is very much harmed.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And of those which are born fleshy, its section is easier, and it is that you insert that behind its root with a broad spatula.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	But of that which is born in the root of the joint, its treatment is difficult; and therefore beware of its incision.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But in that which is born in the finger behind the nuts, know that you pierce at first the flesh of it with a round incision into the bone, and properly saw with one of those convenient saws for that, and treat that until it is healed.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	But consolidation which happens to the fingers between their joints many times or by generation of the man who is born thus, or by consolidation of a poultice or by burning of fire, or by similars, then know that you dry that consolidation until the fingers return to their natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And then apply between their poultices ointment of rose oil so that they are not consolidated easily, and separate those, or apply between them a thin sheet of lead within that is consolidated according to how it is proper.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And similarly if consolidation happens in some fingers with the palm, then you dry that consolidation according to how it is prepared and befitting to the figure of the member.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	Of incision of veins, thus are varicose.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Veins are varicose, and so are thick wrapped veins full of melancholy humors which flow in the parts of the body, and their greatest occurrence in the feet, and most of all in the feet of travelers and laborers and carriers.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Then know that you administer purgation of the body from black cholera some times by strong expulsion, and then bleed the patient from the basilic vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	But their treatment by iron is according to two manners: one is that it be pierced and the black blood is drawn, and the other manner is that the vein is elevated and all of it is extracted.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	Its section is according to this manner: moisten at first the foot with warm water so that the gross blood is dissolved, which is feculent from the foot, and then tighten the foot of the patient at the part above the toe by a bandage, and then dry the vein in one location, or in two, or in three by broad section, and then raise the black blood by its natural strength of the part below the sole into itself, and above that into the foot so that the quantity which you wish to draw and which the strength of the patient will endure.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And then ligature it, and command that he abstains from foods generating black bile.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And repeat the cure by phlebotomy when the veins are filled up and this is noticed in the patient.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	But the elevation of them is according to this manner: you raise the leg of the patient, if there are movements in him, and then put him into bath and embrocate his leg with hot water until it reddens and the veins are dilated; or that he be exercised by strong exercise, if bath is not at hand, until the limb be heated.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And then cut off the cord in the right side of the vein by incision at its top or at the bottom of it near the toe.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And then open up the cord with claws and excise the vein from all sides until it appears in feeling, and this is due to the perception that you see that color declining towards blackness.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And then when you draw out the cord, you will see that white which was cord.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And then you place below it the thread until it is elevated and drained of the cord, and suspend that with silk thread around a needle.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	And then cut another section just after that section by three fingers, and excise the cord from above the vein until it appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	And then elevate that and insert it in the next section below the toe, and then extract it and elevate it until it is drawn out by the second section, and then extract it from the section that is above it.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And do this until you extract it from the section that is most superior or highest of all the sections, so that all is drawn out; and then insert it.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if it does not obey you in being extracted and elevated, then insert a strong needle with a double thread and ligature it and extract it, or insert below the toe and roll your hand to all sides until it is drawn out.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And beware that it not be cut; for if it is broken, it is made difficult to elevate that vein and it has come over the patient by that harm.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when all of it is entirely drawn out, then place over the site of the ulcer wool saturated with wine and rose oil, and cure that until it is healed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the vein is contracted having tortuosity with which there is involution at the parts, and it is not according to rectitude as we have said, then you should split that at all parts of its tortuosity and its involution sites, and then suspend that with claws until you elevate all of it.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And beware that you not cut the vein and plague it, for it will be difficult for you to elevate it; and use your prudence in it.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	Form of the incision with which the vein is dried:
Forma de unci orp:	Form of needle-hole:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not made acute with claws nor of acute extremity so that it does not plague the vein; and it has great flexibility, for if it were subtle, it would cut the vein by its subtlety; it has in it superfluous thickness just as we have said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	Of extraction of the vein of the leg:
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is engendered in the legs in warm lands just as in Al-Ategi in the arid land of Arabia and in the warm and arid lands of India with little moisture, and in which there is neither grass nor water.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And it is engendered strongly in other parts of the body other than the legs.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And its gestation is of putrefaction that comes beneath the cord just as venom within the body of serpents and worms and shrews and worms engendered between the cord and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	And sign of the occurrence of its advent is that the vein happens in inflammation of the leg with vehemence; and then the site is blistered; and then the vein begins to emerge from the site of that blister which resembles a plant root.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And then when you see the extremity of it come out, you must wrap around it a piece of lead weighing as much as a drachm and a half, and hold it there and let the lead hang from the leg.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And as many times as you see it, for some cause, at the parts outside, wrap that in lead and let go of it.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if it is prolonged, then you insert a part of it and wrap the remainder; and do not cut that which is rooted until it is fully drawn out, for if you cut it, it is contracted and goes inside the flesh and causes swelling and pain in the site and ulceration ill.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	Because it should be drawn out little by little until it is fully extracted and does not turn back into the body for any cause.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And this vein emerges in some men who are in their length of 5 to 10 palms and I have seen one that was 20 palms.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is cut in the hour of its medication, then insert the toe into the hole of it and bore that with a long hole into the body until all that which is in the matter is evacuated, and then administer putrefaction of the site for several days with medicines; and then cure that by the cure of ulcers.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein sometimes has swelling bumps, and especially when it appears at the junction of the leg or in the leg, and comes to the feet with orifices, and is drawn out from each orifice.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And then cure it as we have said before in its division.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	Of section for worms engendered under the skin and is called bovine illness.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This illness is named in some land by bovine illness because it often afflicts oxen, and is a worm few at each site which is engendered between the cord and flesh, and goes throughout the body pushing and sinking, and is shown to feeling by its movement from part of member into member until it breaks the cord and emerges out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And its engendering is by putrefaction of some humors just as it happens to worms and serpents and roundworms and tapeworms in the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is dreaded for its malice because when it goes into the body and is elevated to the head, then it pierces the brain and sinks in and destroys the brain, and then it goes many times.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And then when you want to cure it and draw it out, it is not done unless by the movement of its limb and appearance of it to feeling, and then you should bind that which is above it and that which is below it with ligature and strong constriction, and then cut on it and extract it.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is sunken in the flesh and you do not pierce it, then you place cautery with fire over the site where it dwells, and the greatest cause that is dreaded is corruption of it by which it corrupts the site just as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	And if you see it having come to the head near the brain, then bind over the skull with strong ligature, and then cut on it and extract it; and let the patient use purgation of his body by medicines evacuating putrid bad humors, and beware of engendering putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	Of section for the illness of children.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This illness is named in our land child, and it is pain which comes in some limbs, and then it is transferred from limb to limb.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And you already see that according to what you are told.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	I was called to a sick woman in a village, and I uncovered her arm and saw a small inflammation in the vein of the arm, and after she was bled for an hour, I saw that inflammation go away just like worms were pushing against it, but gently, not violently, just as if it were living silver when it moved from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then she went into pain in that location and felt it in the muscle, and soon she stood there for an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And then she ran through the rest of the body until she reached the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And it seemed to me that she was turning herself inside out, as I could see; and I was greatly astonished at her transformation and the speed with which she moved from one member to another.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I had seen before in my own experience that pain can be transferred from one member to another.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	But I have not seen this with my own eyes as it happened to the woman.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I did not think that this was the case, but rather that it is because the woman was very old, and had dry skin and exposed veins, and in this she manifested to my senses that moving windiness.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary for this to not appear in those who are delicate and have moist bodies with hidden veins.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And when you wish to cure her and the patient feels that pain, then it is not for you to appear before him as we have said, but rather stretch out over him gently and slightly and press over that area where that windiness has been cut off, and cauterize the location.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	But if you do not see her with your own eyes, then cure her through the expulsion of wind from the body and with that which expels windiness, and those are pills of myrrh and pills of serapis and their like.
De extraccio de sagetas.	Of drawing out arrows.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrows are various depending on the species and depending on the locations of the body where they hit, for their variety is that some have great points and small ones and concave ones and blunt ones, and solid ones; and some have three angles and some have tongues and some have stars.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And that which is according to the members and the bones in which it occurs is according to two ways: for the members are either principal concavities such as the brain, the heart, the liver, the lungs, the intestines, the bladder, and their like; and therefore when you see one of these members and you sense death approaching, which I will account for soon, then you must avoid drawing out that arrow in those where death is certain in the majority of cases, and when you do not see those bad signs and the arrow is not buried deep within the member, then draw it out and heal the wound.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And the signs of the slave are when an arrow hits him and pierces the bone and is lodged in the sphenoid bone which is above the brain, for then occur violent headache, and scotomata, and vertigo, and heat in the eyes, and inflammation and heat of the tongue, and spasm and confusion of the mind and vomiting of bile, and a strong fever is induced and the speech is disturbed and the voice destroyed, and there is moisture coming out of the wound site like white powder, and his eyes are like water.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And therefore if you see these signs, then refrain from curing and drawing out the arrow unless it is outside.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	But the signs of the arrow when it hits the heart are that it is near the left mammilla, and you feel that it is stuck in a hard cause, and it is not a hollow cause; and very quickly the movement of the arrow is like the movement of the pulse, and it draws black blood from the wound, and then coldness of the extremities, and shivering, and fainting; and therefore know that death descends upon him from all sides.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And the signs when the arrow has pierced the lungs are effusion of frothy blood from the wound and swelling of the vessels that are near the neck and the colour of the patient changes and he breathes out a great spirit with force and asks for fresh air.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the arrow hits the diaphragm which is in the chest, then the pain is near the small ribs and a great wound is made with violent pain and with sighing, and not all the members of the muscles are affected.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if the arrow hits the stomach then very quickly you will see from the wound some undigested food.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if the arrow hits the belly and is lodged in it, then you will see some rent in the wound or the fabric or intestine which has been torn, and there is no hope for a cure by drawing out the arrow.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the arrow hits the bladder and urine flows out from it, and some cause proceeds from it to the parts outside, then very quickly there is pain over the patient, then know that this is fatal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	But the other members such as the face, the neck and throat, and shoulders, and the back and ribs, and furcula, and hip, and thigh and their like of the members, are saved according to the majority of cases when the arrow does not hit a vein or artery and it is not a venomous arrow.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I will account for this to you that I have seen of the nature of these arrows so that you may take note of it regarding your own cure.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The cause of this is because once an arrow hit a man in the tear gland at the root of his nose and I extracted it from him from the other side leaving the bones of his eyebrow intact, and he was healed and did not suffer harm to his eye.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And I extracted another arrow from a Jew which had hit him in the bones of his eye, leaving the eyelid beneath, and the arrow was already hidden and he had not achieved it except for a small extremity with which it adhered to his staff, and it was a great arrow of the sharp arrows of the Turks with lion-head tip and there were no eyebrows.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And the Jew was healed and did not suffer harm to his eye.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And I extracted another arrow from a Christian which had hit him in the throat and it was an Arabic arrow and it was that to which eyebrows adhere; and then I inserted it between two fingers and it was already submerged in his throat and I pulled it out gently and the Christian was healed.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And I extracted another arrow from a man which had hit him in the belly and I thought that he would die from it; and therefore when thirty days had passed and there was not any change to his condition, I inserted my finger into the wound and probed around inside it, and it was healed, and no harm came to him.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And I saw a man in whom an arrow had hit his back and the wound was closed over him, and after hot fire had passed over it for seven years, the arrow came out at the root of his hip.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And I saw a woman in whom an arrow had hit her belly and the wound was closed over her and she did not suffer any change to her natural functions, and the woman did not receive harm in any of them.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And I saw another man in whom an arrow had hit his face and the wound was closed over him and he did not feel any pain from it, and similar things happened to these.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And I extracted the arrow of the king's prince who had hit him in the middle of his nose and he had already turned slightly to the right, and all the arrow was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And I was called to heal him shortly after the arrow entered.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then I found the wound of the arrow very tight; and then I inquired into it with a subtle probe, and did not feel that; but he felt a point below the right ear, and then I perceived that that point was by the extremity of the arrow.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And I plastered the area with an ointment in which there is attractive and digestive virtue, confident that the place would become apparent to me through which it pierced.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And I did not discover in the place any accident that the arrow had achieved; and I continued with the ointment on him for several days and no accidents occurred; and the wound consolidated in the meantime, and he was released from his illness after a space of several days within which one day I felt the arrow within his nose and recognized this to me.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then I placed upon the wound acute corrosive medicine for several days until pus opened up, and with a probe I probed that, and found the extremity of the arrow subtle, which adhered to the wood.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And then I applied in the appearance of the wound that medicine acute until it appeared to me visibly the extremity of the arrow, and I spent time with that over a period of four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And then since the wound was enlarged, and it was possible for me to insert the tongs in it, and remove that, and he did not object to this, I did not cease subtilizing and ingeniously working on that with many ways of skill, until one day about that by means of skills taking him by forceps downward made, according to which will come the form of those in the end of the chapter, I extracted that; and then I restored that wound.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And some doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose was not restored, and I restored that and the wound consolidated, and the patient was healed by perfect health, and did not ache in him in any cause.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I recommend to you the quality of extraction of some arrows for which you pause this rule and significance about which I have not said, because the parts of this art and the definitions of that are not comprehended by narration nor do those understand the book.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the wise artisans compare a few things about one; and about that which is present about that which is absent, and they find new operation and a new instrument due to the descent of strange causes of the art when it happens.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And therefore I say that arrows are not driven out of the members in which they are stuck but according to two ways, or by attraction of the place into which it entered, or by the contrary of the other part.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is driven out through the place through which it entered, or is an arrow proceeding in a fleshy place, and is thrown and driven out.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if it does not obey the time of the hour in which it fell, then you should leave it for several days until the flesh around it becomes putrid and there is repulsion from it and its exit.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	And likewise if it is stuck in bone and does not obey you when it falls, then leave that for several days and repeat that with attraction and motion on each day, and it is driven out.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if it does not obey you after several days, then you should pierce around the arrow in that bone of all parts with a subtle probe until the place is enlarged by the arrow and then extract that.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the arrow is stuck in the bone of the head and has already proceeded into one of the ventricles of the brain, and there appears in the patient some of those accidents which I have said, then abstain from extracting the arrow and leave that for several days until its substance is equalized over several days; for if the arrow pierces the brain, then death is not prolonged.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrow is not stuck but in the core of the bone only and does not pass within the head, and the patient remains for several days, and no accidents occur to him from those causes, then you skillfully work on the attraction of the arrow and on him.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	But if it is deeply stuck and does not obey extraction, then you administer probes around the arrow as we have recommended, and then heal the place so that it becomes well.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	But if the arrow is hidden in the place of the body and is hidden from feeling, then you probe that with a probe, and if you feel that, then throw that with some tools which are convenient to attract it.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot reach it because of the constriction of the wound and because of the length of the arrow, and there is not bone or nerve or vein, then you work on the wound so that it becomes enlarged and it is possible to extract the arrow.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if it is held by the ears with which it is held, then you loosen the flesh in which it is stuck in every part with all the skill you can; and work on that, if you cannot on the exit of the flesh in the fracture of the ears and in twisting those so that it obeys.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in any place where it is, then use with twisting of your hand with forceps on all sides so that it obeys; and subtilize with great subtlety that the arrow not be broken and that it be difficult for you to attract it and that extraction.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot on that from your hour, then leave it for several days until the parts which are around it become putrid, and then repeat that because by that time it is repelled.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	But if you make contrary bleeding of blood, then you administer what we have said of the cure in its chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And guard your skill in cutting of vein or nerve, or tendon, and administer skill in every possible way to the exit of the arrow; and do that with facility and tranquility and slowness and firmness just as I and you have recommended.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And therefore that you contract the arrow so that the patient is according to the figure according to which it was driven into him, for it is more helpful.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	But if that is not possible for you, then you administer what is possible for you according to the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	But the arrows which are driven out through the contrary of the other part, or if from it some part proceeds to outward parts, or causes twitching in the extremity of the arrow by feeling the part above the tendon and feels that prominent; then you probe that; and let the section be according to the quantity in which they take the forceps; and then throw that, for it is easier to obey.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	But if it is retained in the bone, then you twist the needle according to the contrary so that the arrow presses on the bone, and enlarge it by itself, and then extract that.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	And if not, leave that for several days and then repeat that until it is driven out.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the shaft of the arrow is in that, then you push that with him.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	But if the shaft is broken and you want to administer impulsion, then you insert that with him, if it is broken, tool concaved by itself into the hollow of the arrow and then push that with him.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	But if the arrow is concaved, then you push that with a strong tool inserted into that, for the arrow is repelled by that.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	If the arrow is poisoned, then you must cut away all the flesh around the wound, if you can, and treat the wound with what is appropriate.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the arrow pierces the foot, or the belly, or the bladder, or the side, and it is close enough that you can touch it with your finger, then cut into it, if you are able to do so without damaging any vein or nerve; remove the arrow and sew up the wound, if necessary.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Here is a description of forceps used for removing arrows:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	The ends of these forceps are shaped like bird beaks and serrated so that they can grip the arrow tightly without slipping.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And from these are made many different kinds of forceps, large, small, and medium-sized, depending on the size of the arrow, its depth, the width of the wound, and the tightness of the flesh around it.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	Here is a description of an impact tool with a concave end shaped like the crown of an eagle's beak that can be used to drive out the arrow by striking it:
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Here is a description of an impact tool with a flat end:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	It can be used to drive out the arrow by striking it with the concave side, and pushing it out with the flat side.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	Here is a description of phlebotomy, or the cutting of veins:
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so .xxx., de las quals so en le cap .xvi., so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins from which blood is usually bled are: Those in the head number sixteen, two pulsating veins that are near the ears, two green veins that appear on the temples, two veins in the lacrimal glands of the eyes that are called 'aspicents', one vein at the middle of the forehead, and one vein at the tip of the nose; two veins at the neck; two veins at the upper lip; two veins at the lower lip; and — these are called 'algelic' —; and two veins below the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so .v.; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	The veins in the arms that should be bled number five: One of these is the cephalica vein, which resembles a wild leek and is called by the people “the head vein”, it is a superficial and small vein composed of one branch of the basilica and another of the cephalica; and the people call it “the vein of all the body”, the basilica is the vein that lies on the domestic side and is called “citellar” and the commoners call it “vein of the belly”; and the funis of the arm, which lies over the elbow and is where phlebotomy is performed; and salvatella, which is the vein between the ear and the little finger, and has two branches.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	There are three veins in the leg: one is below the jaw of the wild side, the second is sophena, and lies below the leg on the domestic side; and the sciatic vein, which lies below the leg on the wild side; and there are other veins in the leg similar to these.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	Bleed the veins near the ears for old and chronic migraines, and for ancient and malarial ulcers of the head.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of bleeding them is according to what you see: if you notice that the head of the patient is hot, then wash the head with warm water and massage it in the occipital area where both veins are; then tighten the neck of the patient with a bandage so that the two veins near the ears appear at two depressed places on the head; and feel those with your finger, here use your finger.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Then you take the cutting instrument and pierce it at an angle so that it enters below the vein in the bone where the blood comes from.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And then lift your hand up and down the vein and pierce it with an oblique incision.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And let the length of the incision be the amount of two fingers or so, and let as much blood come out as you want.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then tighten it with a bandage and let it heal.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And now I have described in the beginning of this book the incision of these veins and their cauterization.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	But the bleeding of the two arterial veins in the temples is for ancient migraines, and bad blood, and constant eye pain, and sharp pains throughout the body.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of bleeding them is according to what you see: tighten the neck of the patient so that the two veins appear, and feel their pulse with your finger; then use your finger.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And then you lift the bone above the vein and pierce it below, and lift the vein up; and pierce it as you have done in the other two veins; and let as much blood come out as you need.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then loosen the neck of the patient and place your finger on the vein for an hour, then place a bandage and tightening it above it, let it heal.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And now I have described their memory, and the incision of them, and their attraction in the beginning of this book.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And therefore the bleeding of the vein on the forehead is for ancient illnesses of the face, and migraines, and heat, and fetid ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of bleeding it is according to what you see: tighten the neck of the patient with a bandage so that the vein appears, and then take the instrument called  'fossor', of which this is the shape:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Place the prominent point of which is at the tip of the fossor on the vein and pierce it with a needle or other instrument in the manner described, and let as much blood come out as you want; then loosen the piercing of the patient and tighten it so that it heals.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	And sometimes it is opened with a lateral incision, however, it should not be opened with an oblique incision, but with a transverse one, for the bone is close to it and would break it if it were subtle.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	But the bleeding of the two veins in the lacrimal glands of the eyes is for eye pain and heat, and illnesses of the face.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	And the quality of bleeding it is that the patient tightens his neck with a bandage, and then you bleed those veins while standing over him.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And let the incision be made according to the transverse at a length of one finger with few incisions, for in that place there is no flesh; and if the incision is subtle, then the extremity of it is broken.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Then let as much blood come out as you need, and place a bandage over them, and tighten it for a new day, then loosen it.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	But the bleeding of the vein on the nose is for acute heat and violent blood, and illnesses of the face, and migraines, especially when it is ancient.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of bleeding it is that the patient tightens his neck and then touch his nose with your left hand, and take the incision obliquely and pierce it in the middle of the tip of the nose according to a straight line, for the vein does not appear here, and let the blood flow as soon as you begin.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	And when you finish your hand with the phlebotomy little by little and make the blood flow according to your need; and tie it for a night, because that is restored quickly.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	However, the advantage of phlebotomy of the two veins is constriction of the bile and beginning of leprosy and many illnesses and impetigo and bad corrosive ulcers like herpes.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And the quality of phlebotomy of these is that the patient stretches down each in his armpit and the operator stands over the head of the patient, and the patient sits on a stool.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	And then phlebotomize the vein along with little by little wide phlebotomies; and extract blood according to a temperate quantity or according to what you see is needed, because it is at that; and then make it like the other vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And then loosen the ligature and constrict the two veins with a mild constriction so that the patient is not overwhelmed, and leave it into the mat so that the plague is healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	And the advantage of phlebotomy of the veins algerich, brings small abscesses and pustules in the mouth and corruption of the gums and bad ulcers and cracks, and to bad ulcers that are in the nose and around it.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	And the quality of phlebotomy of these is that you make the patient lower his head to you and constrict his neck with a bandage, and then roll back his lips and look for two veins of which one is on the right side of the lip and the second on the left; and the demonstration of each is by the blackness of each of them, and this more because in the circuit of these are small black veins.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	But if doubt is under you, and you don't know which is it, then you understand the incision of the largest of these, and of the most manifest pus of them.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And make like the two veins that are on the lips above.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	But custom more inclines to incising the two veins that are on the lip below.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	But of two veins that are below the tongue, the advantage is appropriately phlebotomy of the cephalic one at infections that are in the gullet, at illnesses of the uvula, and at illnesses of the mouth.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And the quality of phlebotomy of them is that you follow the patient between your hands in front of the sun, and lift his tongue, and look below the tongue, from one side of him vein and from the other side vein, and the color of each is declining to blackness.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And then phlebotomize each one; and keep that you do not finish your hand in phlebotomy of them, because below those are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the veins that are phlebotomized in the head are those in which usually runs in all men, and the phlebotomy of them is done according to two manners, either put with the phlebotomy mirtilat or olive at subtlety declining; or secsar with phlebotomy cutellar, and it calls if alnessil, and this is its form:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this alnessil is that it agrees to secsar and of those are special sides and subtle according to the amplitude of the veins and according to the constriction of them.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Form of phlebotomy mirtilat:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	Be the side of him thus with looking, and agree to open the veins concave full proceeding apparent thick, and to those that contain thick twisted blood.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	And this is the form of phlebotomy olive:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And this phlebotomy is of lesser width and more subtle extremity, and agrees to phlebotomy of subtle veins that contain subtle citrus blood.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	But the advantage of phlebotomy of the basilic vein which is one of three veins: because extracted the blood from the illnesses that are below the gullet and neck, and from what affects the feet and belly.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And it agrees to the phlebotomist, when phlebotomy that one, that he guard well and be on top of it, because below him is an artery, and if he errs and adjusts in the puncture of the phlebotomy, incise that artery and access flow of blood, so that he should not phlebotomize that with puncturing phlebotomy, before being cut off with alnessil.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the basilic does not appear by manifest appearance, then let you leave that and move to the other one or seek some branch of it; or phlebotomize in the end of the arm, because that one is manifest; and cut off that with phlebotomy alnessil as we have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	But if you want the phlebotomy of it meteyssa, then let in front of the constriction of the arm that you touch the place between which you know the location of the pulse, and then press on it with a thong; and let go of the arm and cut off the vein with secsar concave with phlebotomy alnessil as we have said; and keep that the percussion box for some space of the location of the artery.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	And when you see, with constricting the ligature, swelling in the location that you have pressed with a thong, then that swelling is of the artery, and therefore loose that one.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if you see the blood flow in the phlebotomy thus with shining of child's milk, and the blood is subtil red, then know that it is of the blood of the artery; and then you press and pause your thumb over that for long space; and prop your thumb, and if the blood is cut off, because many times it is cut off, then you constrict the arm and leave that one.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And keep the patient of the phlebotomy for several days until he is healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	But if the blood is not cut off and you see that medicine to it does not help at all, then you incise the artery if it appears to you; because its extremity is contracted, and the blood is cut off; or take a piece of fistic, and fen it, and take the one end and constrict that over the location of the vein with constriction descending am ligature and am powder within on another day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And then if the blood is cut off, well; and not, then heal that one by what from which it preceded to the remembrance of the location of the powders cut off flow of blood.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And the incision of the blood of it is difficult in many dispositions by the small location of the plague and the possibility of the constriction of the arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	But of the dark vein phlebotomy is advantage that extracted the blood from the superior part of the head and from the lower part of the body; because it is composed of a branch of the basilic and a branch of cephalic, as we have said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And let the phlebotomist that one be on top in the phlebotomy of it, because below that is a nerve; and then if he adjusts in the puncture of the phlebotomy and hits the nerve, stupor will happen to him, and it is difficult for him to heal, and strong he is not healed at all; and this nerve many times appears to the sense; and if it is hidden in some men and is subtle and not shown, then let you pause the phlebotomy with which you phlebotomize with secsar of alnessil, and avoid the nerve by your strength.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if the vein is between two nerves, then you fen the vein in length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The advantage of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is that it attracts blood from the head and gives to illnesses of the eyes.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And in this place specifically, if you want to let the phlebotomies bleed with olive phlebotomes or with myrtle phlebotomes; because it is the safest for all veins, since there are no arteries or nerves here.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	But nevertheless it is necessary that you should make the phlebotomy in such a way that with the phlebotomes you do not puncture only the head of the lymph node, but seek the place further away and do not press on it, unless it is moved by the first percussion that is over that where the phlebotomy will be made several times.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	But very seldom is an abscess formed in some people when they are not phlebotomized on the first percussion, but they do not press on that abscess.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	But the quality of the phlebotomy of this and its accidents are many things, in which you need to consider their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first of these is that you should know that phlebotomy is not administered except in preservation of health and for hope of it and precaution against onsets of illnesses, and that phlebotomy be made at the beginning of spring, after breakfast in spring and autumn, and in winter shortly after eating, when there appear signs of fullness.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And phlebotomy be made on the third day or on the first more than three hours after dawn.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	But phlebotomy that is administered, but when it provokes convenience and necessity for it, either at night or day, in every hour and at all times.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And an infant should not be phlebotomized until he is fourteen years old, and a pregnant woman should not be phlebotomized except for the fourth month until the seventh, and the elderly should not be phlebotomized when they have already passed sixty years.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And when someone wants to be phlebotomized for some reason, it is necessary that he cleanse his bowels before the phlebotomy with a lion’s-womb enema, if in these there are retained fissures, so that the veins do not throw off the superfluities in the phlebotomy of the bowels, which are purified, and so that they do not harm the principal members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And let those who are phlebotomized not be nauseous and drunk, nor recovering from illness or drunkenness until this is eliminated from them, nor sick of hydropsy, but let phlebotomy be feared when there is colic pain and vomiting, and after abdominal discomfort, and after multiplication of cough and fever and exertion from breakfasts or vigils and from all causes that dissolve strength, either corporeal or animal.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And also consider the subtlety of humors before that if the blood is thick, with foods and drinks, and with medicines if it is possible for that.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And also go into a bath if no cause prohibits it, or be exercised by some exercise so that the blood is made subtle.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And make phlebotomy at about the third hour of the day, as we have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And for that the feet of that one be guarded on that day from all accidents of animals, as they are anguish, anger, fear, and from all corporal accidents, as they are exertion and excessive pain and cough and their likenesses.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And let the causes be present in the use of which the blood is used by men with aromatics and incense and balms and their likenesses according to the quantity of possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And let the phlebotomist follow on a cushion that is higher than the cushion of him who must be phlebotomized.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And also stretch out his arm, and wipe that with his hand the phlebotomist two or three times; and also tighten the bandage with a strap and wrap it two times.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And let the compression be moderate, because compression when it is equal or the compression is of superfluity, then flow of blood is prohibited; or it is of softening, and then blood of the body flows out.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And also let that one who is to be phlebotomized rub his hands together in between them until the veins are swollen and declared by feeling.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And let the phlebotomist anoint his phlebotomes with a little old oil properly; and also pause his finger of the left hand over that vein from which he wants to phlebotomize so that the vein escapes a little, and the compression is relaxed because from those veins through which the blood flows out is the one through which the phlebotomy should be made, and when he pauses the phlebotomes over it are contracted by the phlebotomes, and the phlebotomist is discharged; and if the phlebotomes open the vein, that one is contracted.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And thus, for this reason let the phlebotomist be careful and persistent in all these causes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And also pause the phlebotomes, but if the vein is opened in one go, then it is; and if not, you iterate that again another time over that location a little, or on it with compression, if the location is not inflamed.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the location is inflamed or the patient becomes frightened, then let him be laid for a day or two, and do not tighten the bandage, because it will soon draw out the abscess cauterizing, nor enter into a bath.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And also iterate the phlebotomy if he desires it.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the impression is small and the blood flows subtly and he fears that there does not flow blood in the quantity which he wants, then iterate the phlebotomes on that wound according to rectitude and adjust it a little in the impression, and do this with compression before the location is inflamed, because the location is inflamed in many men through little impression.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	But if he has already been inflamed, then do not iterate on it because it does not excuse you for any cause; and pause over that any part of the wound with oil, because it soothes the blood of the body.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And is better in this location than other oils.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	And likewise administer oil in every phlebotomy when the phlebotomes are stopped by the prohibition of flow of blood of the body, and make tyriaca with alfredoc and sagzenea when it is paused over that one of those on the location, because the blood is made subtle and is drawn out when it is thick.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if a large abscess is engendered at the location of the phlebotomy because many times it has happened and more to that one which was not phlebotomized except for that go, or in the impression of the vein little, then let him be cauterized and pause over the location sponge moistened with water and salt, a little heated, and tighten that for an hour, because it is dissolved.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And let him make that also the flow of blood from that vein with completion of it or from another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if there appears in the location for some days blackness or greeness, do not press on it; and if you wish, pause over that any cause of aloe and dissolved myrrh, or any cause of juice of wormwood or of powder or its likeness.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	And many times it has happened that abscesses and protuberances are engendered by phlebotomy of the basilica.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And thus pause your hand over that and if you then tighten the softness with your compression over that, then that protuberance is evil and bad; and therefore beware that you pause over that any cause of what we have said, because it will soon flow from the artery blood.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And make a plaster with that in which it is tight, so that the location be hardened, and also cure that with the other cure when it has healed.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And anyone who extracts blood from every person according to the amount of his virtue and according to the color appearing on the blood, according to what appears.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	Because if the blood is black, then let it be left until it becomes red; and similarly, if you see it thick, then let it be left until it becomes thin; and similarly, if it is sharp, let its acuteness be stopped.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And to whom it is full and strong and has the need of bloodletting in one sitting, then let the phlebotomy be amplified and the phlebotomies be wide.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And for one who is pale, let the opposite of that be done to him; and whoever extracts that in several sittings, then let the incision be tight.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	And the best that is administered in phlebotomy of the vein is that it be a cross-section, not a puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	And this manner of phlebotomy is safe from bleeding and incision of the nerves, and it is more praiseworthy and safer than phlebotomy according to width and length.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And to whom it is accustomed to have a fainting after the phlebotomy, then treat that person before the phlebotomy with a little bread infused in wine of pomegranates or of simple oxymel warmed; and extract from him some blood in three or four sittings.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if it is weakness of complexion, then take before the phlebotomy bread infused in myrrh syrup or in scented honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and similar, or scented syrup and very aromatic.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if a fainting occurs due to the phlebotomy, and it is caused by losing too much blood, then take before drinking water with meat and scented syrup very subtle; and use of aromatics with aloes wood, and let him apply that to his feet.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use the other causes which we have mentioned in the division in the chapter on fainting by evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And whoever wants to vent his arms and dissolve his blood in the second sitting, then let him who has phlebotomy as much evacuation, and whose virtue is cold, evacuate the blood little by little according to the amount of his virtue in continuous days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	But whoever wants to vent his arms and withdraw his blood a second time, and his body is strong, then let him do that about seven or nine hours from the first phlebotomy.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	But whoever wants to withdraw blood from his body in the opposite direction to which he is declining, then let him be vented on the second or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	But the body in which much blood has already been withdrawn and it is acute and causes fever, then let him have his blood withdrawn in one sitting and have a large quantity withdrawn from him and have the incision amplified so that fainting does not occur; and when the doctor's hand on the pulse of the patient so that death does not occur in place of fainting, for many times this happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And do not press when you want to withdraw blood and evacuate blood a second time, when the orifice of the vein is already closed and it is difficult to draw blood, because if you press strongly on that and it is extended slightly, then that is very bad.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Let it not remain so that it is phlebotomized again; or if there is a clot of blood in the orifice of the vein, pause on that with alfarach or with saguine, and compress that gently until the blood comes out.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein is swollen, then leave it and do not touch it until the swelling goes down.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if the need arises to evacuate the blood again, and it is not an excuse, then you will bleed that person on that spot or on the other arm in another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the vein called “veins of the arm” is phlebotomized instead of the basilic or the cephalic when they are not found or are hidden, because it is composed of those.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	And the quality of phlebotomy of it is that the patient immerses his hand in warm water so that the vein becomes dilated and appears apparently.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	Then let it be tightened on that with a ligature with mild tightness, and let the phlebotomy be done according to the small cross, not longitudinally nor according to length.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And let the incision be wide and let your phlebotomy with which you phlebotomize that person be on the joint of the hand a little.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if the flow of blood is prohibited, then immerse the hand in warm water and let the blood run in the water until you see your need.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	But if you are in the days of summer, then you will be excused from immersing the hand in warm water; and let the body of the blood be paused in cold water during winter.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And phlebotomy of this vein is safer than of all the other veins, because there is no pulsating vein or nerve in it.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And phlebotomy of the wrist of the right hand is related to diseases of the liver.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of phlebotomy of it is that you tighten the hand with a ligature or your hand, because you have immersed it in warm water, until the vein is swollen and is demonstrated obviously to the eye; and let the incision be made transversely on it; and if the incision is made anywhere else, then it will not benefit at all.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And take care that you do not cut your hand with the phlebotomy, because underneath there are nerves of the fingers stripped of flesh.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	Then immerse the hand in warm water and let the blood run in that, because if you do not immerse it in the warm water, the blood will clot in the orifice of the vein, and its flow is prohibited.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And when the blood is withdrawn according to the amount of need, then let you pause on the vein olive oil and salt, so that it does not clot firmly; and similarly, let you do in every branch tightly.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	But the benefit of phlebotomy of that of the left hand is related to diseases of the brain.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And do similarly in the phlebotomy of it as you have done in the other one.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And the benefit of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is to diseases that are below the body, as well as diseases of the mother, and to retention of menstruation, and to diseases of the knees and ulcers of the legs, and their likes in diseases.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	And the quality of phlebotomy of it is that the patient immerses his foot in warm water and rubs on that so that the veins appear; and press on the joint of the foot with a strap; and the location of the vein let it be seen from the toe pushing, and from there it branches into the fascia of the foot many branches.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And therefore phlebotomize the wider ram or below the leg from where the toe comes, because it is better and more safe.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if phlebotomize that in the fascia of the foot, then you must guard against the nerves that are below that on the fascia of the foot; and let your phlebotomy be made according to the cross, just as if you wanted to make an incision.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And let the phlebotomies be mild.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	But if the flow of blood is prohibited, then immerse his foot in warm water and let the blood run in that until it is evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	If the phlebotomist makes a mistake on the first attempt, then repeat with the phlebotomy on a few more occasions, for the site is salty; and do not fear ill will from him, but rather protect yourself from the nerves as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And similarly, treat the other foot in the same way.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And for the sciatic vein, the site as we have said is below the ankle of the wild part.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And the cause of pain in the hip when phlebotomy is performed is because of clotted blood.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient enters into a bath, and hastens and tightens his thigh from the side of the buttock up to above the ankle in four places with one long, thin bandage, for it does not appear except through this.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And therefore, when it appears, then you phlebotomize that according to each plan that is possible for you and according to the cross, and it is better; or pierce that through incision or cut that through section, for the site of it is salty.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And it is in most men hidden; and if you pierce that and it does not appear to the senses at all, then phlebotomize a branch of it, and it is that which appears on the back of the foot opposite the little finger and the ring finger.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And beware of the nerves, and let blood flow in the quantity that you want.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	Then loosen the tightness and place a bandage over the site of the phlebotomy tightly, for quickly it will be healed.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Of ventilation and of the qualities of using those.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Ventozes are of horn, or of ram, or of bone.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	And ventilation is done according to two manners: one of them is with scarification and extraction of blood, and the other is ventilation without scarification.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this ventilation which is without scarification is according to two manners, for it is either with fire or without fire.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And to the ventozes that are administered with scarification and extraction of blood there are fourteen locations in the body, of which one in which ventozes are placed is the alnocrati, and it is the posterior part of the head; and the middle location of them of two parts of the neck together; and ventozes of the mentum below the mandible further down from the mouth; and ventozes of two spatulas; and ventozes of the aloetaster, and it is above the end of the tail; and ventozes of two focils, and they are of two breasts; and ventozes of two cavilhas; and ventozes of two thighs.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	And ventilation does not extract blood except from the small, sparse veins in the flesh, and for this reason it does not possess the virtue of those as cauterization through phlebotomy; nor do I believe that ventilation should be done with fire or without fire in any disease caused by fullness when the whole body is evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	But if necessity prompts ventilation for disease or for continuous, we administer that throughout the entire hour at the beginning of the month and in its end, and in the middle location of it and in any time it is.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The cause of which is that in men there is blood multiplied within when indigestion occurs from extraction of it through ventilation and it causes heaviness and swelling in their head; and in those who cause fullness and heat in their face and in their head, and in their neck; and in those who cause pulsation in the face and on the forehead and darkness and feebleness in their eyes; and in those whose mouth is dry; and in those whose sleep is disturbed; and in those who see blood in their sleep with heat and age spots and other causes similar to them.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And therefore when you see in any cause of those, and particularly if it is in the third or middle of the month, then we command ventilation to be done after two or three hours have passed of the day.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And advantage of ventilation of the nape is that when it conferes to heaviness in the head and to that which is sunken into the eyes; but beware that this be proper evacuation of the whole body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this ventilation is in the site of phlebotomy of the cephalic.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it is not proper to use that which is of complex friction, or in which there is catarrh, for it gives great harm to him.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And for this reason it is not proper that use of that by the elderly, and in heads in which there are cool diseases.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	But to him for whom that is continually over him is done forgetfulness; and for this reason you command the ventozador to pause his hand a little with the ventosa at the sites below, fearing the generation of forgetfulness.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	But ventilation of alkehel is in the site of phlebotomy of the fusca vein and of the basilica: and for this reason it confers to asthma, and to constriction of throat and to splitting of voice of throat, and to cough, and to fullness.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And it is proper that the ventosa of alkehel be bound a little, for if it is placed below, it generates weakness in the body and in the stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And ventilation of alhagdahan confers to accidental pains in the head and to ophthalmia, and to emigration, and to pre-fever, and to pains in the roots of teeth; and it is in the site of phlebotomy of the basilica.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And you command the ventozador not to press his hand with scarification so that it does not pierce the artery and cause flow of blood.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And ventilation below the mentum confers to alcola in the mouth, and to corruption of the gum, and to appearance similar to them of diseases which are in the mouth, and they stand in the site of phlebotomy of aligeric which is on the two lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	But the ventilation which is done over the two spatulas confers to caphatan, which is done through fullness of heat.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And the ventilation of the two sites within the breasts confers advantage of phlebotomy of three veins, that is, of the basilica, fusca and cephalic, for it attracts blood from all those veins more delicate than the other veins more coarse within that the attraction reaches the three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And command the ventozador that he does not proceed with scarification, for the site is deprived of flesh, and below it are nerves and arteries.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And it is one ventilation with which is ventilated over the buttocks and confers to hemorrhoids of the anus and to ulcers further down.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And you command the ventozador that it be large ventilation, and that it is of horn, for the site indigests from strong section; and it is done with strong piercings strong and ventilation be bound subtle piercings and is scarified with scarification.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	But ventozes of the thighs be done through mild mildness, for they will draw blood from all the body, and confer to ancient pains of the knees and of the mother, and of the bladder; and they provoke menstruation, and confer to bothor and ademil; and they stand in the site of phlebotomy of two sophenas, and under the armpits, and of two cavilhas.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	However they weaken all the body and cause syncope in some men.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And of the ventozes under the armpits, the advantage is similar to the advantage to the ventozes of two thighs.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	The quality of the cupping position is that you place the cup at the beginning, let it suck with moderate suction, and do not prolong the position of the cups, but place them lightly, and leave them tightly, so that the humors come to the site evenly.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not cease to iterate this and continue until you see the site already reddened and swollen and the heat of the blood appearing.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And then you scarify and iterate the suction little by little, and then consider the disposition of the body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	Because a man who has tender flesh in few places, you should scarify him once and not pus, so that the site is not ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And command the cupper to enlarge the scarification and take a few, and temper the suction with ease.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if the blood is thick, then you should scarify twice, because in the first cupping, the pathway of subtlety to the blood and its moisture is opened.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	But in the second, it acquires penetration through the extraction of thick blood.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the blood is very foul, then let the third cupping be done so that the residue is achieved.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	And finally, when we want to extract blood little by little or a little bit, it is enough for us with one scarification.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we want to extract a lot of blood, we scarify with a deep scarification; and if we know that the blood is thick, then let us scarify with a gentle scarification.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the term of scarification in which the depth of the skin is only as much.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if the person whose skin is thick, tough, dark, and whose pores are tight, then let the sites of the cups be anointed gently, widely, and resolutely; in summer time, likewise with oil of aloe or oil of violet, or oil of almond shells, or oil of cedar wood; and in winter time, then with oil of nut, or oil of larch, or oil of camomile, or blood, and to those like them.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the superfluity is thick, tough, then let the oil be of myrrh, or oil of balsamita, or oil of aloe, or oil of anise, and to those like them.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	But if the cupper has ample pores of tender flesh, then let oil be prohibited from him, and let the sites of the cups be washed with vinegar or with hot water of solanum, or with water of cedar wood, or with water of borderwaters, and to those like them.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And if the person whose blood is of great moisture, wash their cups with sour wine, or with water of myrtle and sumac, and similarly to those.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And if the superfluities are thick, wash their cups with old wine, or with water of sanser, which is marjoram, or with decoction of anise, or of camomile, and to those like them.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And let the cupping be kept away from bathing; while having it administered after bathing for one or two hours, and let him sleep after the cupping.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What should one do who needs to be bled by cupping before venesection?
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	Let him consider first: if the cupper or he who is to be bled is choleric and has hot blood and inflammation over him, then let him take causes of frigidity, likewise with acetic milfoils, and endive in sour wine and leeks, and squill, and julep, and to those like them.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And let him stop eating thus with pullets, and meats of fat fowls, and seasoned foods with vinegar, and to those like them.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And if the person whose complexion is hot, let him take in drinking esserop of honey, or esserop of squill seeds, and sumac, and very fragrant wine between spring and summer; and let it be commanded to him that he use little of drinking and eating, and let his foods be pullets and canabis, and peas, and pigeons, and doves.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And let him drink more in the day of cupping and phlebotomy than he eats.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And let him be given in drinking at certain times to some men myrrh of alpha-arack, or medicines of musk, so that it is muscaded, or alcelita before cupping or phlebotomy or afterwards, so that the principal members are made comfortable and the blood be subtle; and let them not take those scaldings.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	But the cups that are after scarification be cups that are paused over the liver, and over the melsa and podagra, and over the umbilical, in the sites of the joints, and the pubis of the hip, because these members do not suffer scarification upon themselves.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And it is not wanted by those except for attraction of blood of member, likewise with pause the cup over the breast in malady of flow of blood of the blood of the nose; and use that so that subtle thick heat of the member is dissolved, likewise with pause over the belly and umbilical; because that rarefies the member and burns it and removes the pain that resolves the heat of the member.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And it is also paused over the testes when they become in their swelling or pain, because through virtue of strong attraction their swelling and pain is eradicated from its site.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And similarly it does when it is paused over the liver and melsa, because of cupping in those in confinement.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	And these cups are administered thus with suction only; and some are administered with fire.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And some are administered full of tepid water in the maladies of the liver.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And for that the cup is filled and pus comes out great, it is water with which are cuited herbs according to what is convenient.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Form of cup administered with fire: let the aperture of the orifice be two digits, according to how we have formed it; and the quantity of the fire be the measure of a palm; and let its length in the site where it is in the circuit, the measure of it be the measure of itself, the pierce be small according to the quantity that enters into it an awl.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	Let it be made of wood of wild rose or citron tree, of thick margins, lion, inwal nut and horse-chestnut so that it does not lead the member according to its position upon it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And let it be over the middle of it a transverse band of wood or iron, where is paused candle with the fire.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And it is also this cup great much more than that which we have described; and the little less of that according to the maladies and the state of him who uses that.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the cups of children and exhausted ones are smaller than those of young people and large bodies.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the quality of pausing this cup with fire upon the member is that it extends the mace with decent fire before a little candle of wax, and pause that over the middle of the transverse band in the middle site of the cup, so that the fire be lit around the lower part so that the body of the sick person is not burned.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And then it is paused over the member of the sick person, and the finger is over the pierce that we have said, while we hold the cups and do not move the finger and let the steam go over that pierce, the cup is so dissolved immediately.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And then light the candle according to its use, and relight it if it goes out.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	But the cupping glass that is administered for pleurisy, with water in which there is neither a transverse membrane nor a hole, and it is not administered unless it has been filled with water, and is placed over the affected part alone.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is its shape: And this cupping glass when it is largest, that is the best, so that it can receive a large quantity of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Chapter 97.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Leeches are not applied to small parts of the body unless it is impossible to apply cupping glasses there because of their small size, as with the eye and gum and similar parts, or to exposed flesh, as with the finger and nose and similar parts.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using leeches that you have found in the double-wallered, clean, blood-red waters.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And let them be left in the water for a day and night until they become hungry, and let no cause remain in their bellies; and let the body be evacuated at the beginning by phlebotomy and by cupping glasses; and let the affected parts of the patient be rubbed until they turn red; and let them be placed on him.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are full, then...
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if it is possible to draw out the poison from that spot by cupping glasses, it is better done by suction.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	And if not, then wash the affected spot with mild wine and then with tepid water; and let it be rubbed and squeezed out.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the flow of blood is prolonged due to the application of leeches and it oozes out, then you should soak a cloth in cold water and place it over the affected area so that the oozing stops.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the blood is profuse, then powder vitriol, or gall nuts and similar astringent substances of the causes, should be sprinkled over the affected area until the bleeding stops; or cooked split peas should be placed on it and left until the peas adhere to the spot, and the blood stops.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And if necessary, the leeches can be reapplied when they have been changed.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if the leeches are prohibited from being suspended, then the affected area should be rubbed with fresh blood or an needle should be pricked into the spots so that blood comes out; and let them be placed there, for when they sense some blood it will come out right away.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want them to stop, sprinkle a little crushed aloe, or salt, or ash over them, and right away they will.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Thus begins the discussion of the third part: of restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is many times necessary in the art of medicine; and it is a restoration from fracture and from accidental dislocation in the bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh son, wise one, know that the foolish doctors and the common people and those who have never read the books of the Ancients nor understood a letter from them speak foolishly about this chapter.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason, this way of the wise in our land is prohibited; and I have not committed it at any time; and I have not practiced that which teaches, unless through length of reading the books of the Ancients and studying on the understanding of those, so that I extracted the science from them.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And I also added experience and study throughout the length of my life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have already described in this chapter everything that my science and experience teach me about this subject; for I have abbreviated it for you and delivered it from the occupation of lengthening; and I have shortened it at the end of the declaration, and illustrated it with many forms of the instruments which are administered in it, as has been done by addition of declaration, as I have done in two preceding chapters.
Capitol primier.	First chapter.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Summary and collections from being fractured bones, from which their premise is necessary before we begin the remembrance of the members of fractures and of various ones if one by one.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Therefore let us begin the summary of this chapter, and the chapters to the understanding of which at the beginning the artisans are forced, and to the truth of those: it is you and those who are adept in this noble art that you learn from others.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And therefore I say that when accidents happen to any fracture or dislocation or twisting or herniation, then let you be concerned at the beginning with phlebotomy or bleeding him, or with some poultice, if no contrary cause prohibits it, as for weakness of strength, or he is an infant, or old in decrepitude, or there is violent heat, or violent rubbing.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And let him be fed on a diet of green vegetables and meat of birds and crabs; and let him abstain from fatty meats and from filling foods that fill the veins with blood, so that you guard against pus in the affected member, and if you do not fear an effusion of matter.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And let him then return to his first regimen with which he was accustomed.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And therefore when the broken bone begins to be restored, then let the patient be fed on nutritive foods of light and coarse and heavy foods in which there is viscosity, as well as on cooked foods made from wheat with water, rice, and peas, and fish, and fresh meat, and groats, and similar to these, and with this regimen coagulation of the fracture is made more slowly and better.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And know that the fractured bones when they are in old people and in the elderly, it is not possible for them to be continued and consolidated according to their nature because of the drying up of the members of them.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they are consolidated and continued according to their nature at all times by the drying up of those members, and they are continued and consolidated by the old ones when they are in the end of softness, as well as the bones of small children.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	Nature however adjusts and connects the broken bone of every part any cause similar to a clot in which there is thickness that adheres and strengthens it together so that it comes to its end of strength and firmness, as well as fire at the beginning, so that no cause prohibits that from its works.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason it is necessary that you stop the patient's diet, a diet in which there is heaviness and viscosity and coarseness, as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	The diversity of fracture according to the diversity of the member.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And know that the species of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of the members, for the fracture of the bone of the leg is diverse from the fracture of the bone of the head; and the fracture of the bone of the foot is diverse from the fracture of the bone of the arm; and similarly all other members are diverse among themselves.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And I win by remembrance of every species of fracture, explained in my distinct chapter from another.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	The diversity of fracture within itself.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And the species of fractures of the bone are diverse within themselves; for there is made an arcuate fracture another that occurs in them in stars; and some times the fracture is according to the length of the bone: and they are fractures of the satagia and angles and additional ones, as well as when it is prepared for writing, and a fracture is a fissure in the head, and a fracture is a little crack.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And there is a specific pain or torture unique to the restoration of him according to what will come to his memory distinctly in his places.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	Here is another sentence:
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And because of this, a fracture of the bone is known: it is its tortuousness and that eminence and its appearance to the senses, and from it when you compress it with your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And therefore when there is not in the place a tortuousness apparent or from it not made because of your touching when you touch the bone with motion and the patient finds no great pain, then there is no fracture here.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	It is possible that there is tortuosity or a small crack, then it does not behoove you to wince when you touch it with your hand and with compression of all; rather pause over it medicines of which come memory fittingly to the place; and then be tight by subtle constriction.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And know that the place when it is arched and not split into two or anything else that does not happen in it satagie, as all is completely split from its comparison, then behoove you to commence from your hour to rectification of it before what happens in it apostema cautery.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if in it happens apostema cautery, then let it be for several days until the apostema ceases; and then heal that according to any manner that you can of elevation and of healing.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And know that restoration of it and piercing of it is more difficult than of the bone in which happens satagie.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And then strengthen it according to what will come the memory of it.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	But if in the bone so satagies, then is necessary extension of that broken member from two parts, if it is the hand or the foot; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two cords or with one cord and the hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And be your position with which you pause the member place healing according to its natural figure, while the parts so extend from the broken member, then you perforate that returning those adductions with healing and according to any manner that you can in their places.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And guard yourself according to your strength that does not happen over the patient through your operation of pain or harm; and perforate you according to your power that you apply one bone to another companion according to their best forms.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And behoove you in that hour advantageously you touch with your hand that, and if you see here any diverse cause, rectify that and heal that through the quantity of your virtue.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And avoid violent extension and compression, likewise as many foolish doctors who many times cause apostema cautery through their operation, or cause contraction in the member likewise as we have seen that through the operation of them many times.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And then attach, then equilibrium and decent operation and constriction of that member, and rest and tranquillity; warn the patient about that and do him to avoid wincing in the hour of his vigils and sleeping, and see his revolution and motion, and attend to his excretion, and attend to all his movements with all your virtue; and guard if the position of the member is position with which he is secured from pain or harm; then change that to another position with which he does not feel pain; and guard with that that the position of it be straight and healed, so that no tortuosity happens to the member when it is restored.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of the constriction of the broken member is that which you consider; for you know that the broken members are diversified in their smallness and in their greatness and in the form of them.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And of those which are small likewise as the arm and the finger and the wrist and similar to them, then let the wrapper be of very fine cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	But those which are large likewise as the thigh or the leg, then let the wrapping be firm and hard, for the firm binding connects the large member and strengthens it from all parts with equal constriction, so that in it does not enter a crack.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And then commence, then your evacuation of equilibrium, pause convenient ligament to that, over the place of that fracture with three or four wrappings according to how the member merits; and strengthen your hand a little with the ligament.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And then go to that to the most superior part of the place of the fracture, and strengthen mind so that you do not focus your constriction with which you have strengthened the place of the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	And then elongate yourself with wrapper of the place of the fracture a little, and soften the constriction little by little, while you take from it a great part.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	And then take another bandage and wrap that other part over the broken place with wrapper, and then go to the wrappings at the most inferior part of the fracture; and be your operation in the constriction of the wrapper and in softening of that likewise as we have said in the primary wrapper above.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And then pause between the wrappings of wool or cloth with which is healed the tortuosity of the fracture, if in it is tortuosity; and if not, do not pause in it any cause.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And then pause over it another bandage, and then heal over these wrappings decently made liniments at once, if in the place is not inflammation or apostema cautery, and then pause over it that which seats the apostema cautery and which heals the inflammation; and let that be for several days; and then strengthen over it the bandages.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And the liniments be of the thickness of a cane shaft, and be formed wisely; or be of wood of pine; or of reeds of palm; and be the width of each bandage according to this form and this figure:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, let the bandage that is paused over that fracture be thicker and harder a little than the other bandages, and the length of the bandage according to how it is measured to the member in greatness and smallness; and then strengthen over the bandages with another bandage according to your primary constriction; and then bind over it with faithful wire decently according to what we have said of constriction, and be your constriction according to the place of the fracture less, and how less is elongated from the fracture.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And let the threads be medium in thickness and fineness, and be of wire; and if the threads are thick, likewise as we have seen through the operation of some foolish pausing their threads of cords of wire, and it is great error when constricts the equality away.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And equally thick threads are not convenient, for you will not achieve through constriction with them what you want, and let there be space between bandage and bandage of one finger.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient is hurt by the ends of the bandages then strengthen in the places his wool or cotton between that does not harm him.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Sometimes fracture is with swelling, and happens disruption in the tendon, and I come to memory in that in the head according to particularity.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And know that not all broken member is tightened with bandages on the first day; the cause of which is that the member, when it is great, let you pause over it bandages but after several days or a week or more, according to your security of occurrence of apostema cautery.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	And this is the manner of the bandages with which the Ancients restored, which were paused over fracture and dislocation and wrenching.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Manner of bandage as well wetted with restoration of fracture, convenient to many complexities and mostly to women and children, for it is that which takes from powder of ground, and is the core of the flour that comes from motion of the mill in the walls of the mill.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And season it thus, but add a little white pepper to the broth and use this not thick nor thin; and then use it.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another way of making a plaster that heals fractures and dislocations and twists: Take assafetida, myrrh, acacia, enula camphor, and mace, which is ground from wild peppercorns, all in equal drachms; myrrh and aloe each in five drachms; aloes in twenty drachms; let them all be ground and sieved and mixed with honey water or with white egg yolk if the patient' skin is injured; then use this plaster which has a good composition and quickly restores broken bones, and confers to many people.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another way of making a plaster that heals fractures and twists: Take mace and ground white alder in ten drachms each; myrrh and aloe in five drachms each; acacia in six drachms, and Armenian bole in twenty.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All are ground in a mortar with rose water, and sifted, and made into a paste with vinegar or white wine and then applied.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Method of plaster for joints and bones separated from their sockets, and pain occurs in them, and to fissures and fractures: take some clean wool and soak it in sweet wine and oil and place it on the affected area.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	Perhaps this plaster does not have the virtue of restoration, but it will soothe and draw out pains quite well.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another method of a plaster that restores broken bones: take the bark of wild fig and the bark of wild poppies; grind both into a powder and make them into a plaster.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida .i.; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Method of a plaster that promotes the healing of broken bones and when you want resolution of the residue of an abscess: take powdered white poplar bark, camomile flowers, violet flowers, and bran, of all these in equal parts .i.; all are ground and made into a paste with wine if the wound is not raw.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	But if it is raw, then season that with warm water of celery or vinegar and use it.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another method of a very strong plaster for resolution that this first one, when pustules appear on the healing of the member: take powdered white poplar bark and linseed, and black thistle, marjoram, violet flowers, camomile, of all these in equal parts i and grind them, then make into a paste with vinegar or warm water or wine, according to the quality of the wound and the color of it.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	But ipocras does not dry in the open air, so it should be placed over the broken bone to promote healing of it unless a poultice is made of wax and oil and nothing else, and wrapped so that it lies between thickness and thinness.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	But Gualia is seen to be placed over the broken bone for its healing and the causes in which there is dryness with little heat are also like those of the causes we have recounted.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	Method of a plaster that provides relief to injuries and pain: take myrrh, cedar wood, human hair or horse tail, and white poplar bark, and salt, all in equal parts; grind and sift them, then make into a paste and make the plaster.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	But the quantity according to the wound that is bound up, and then loosen it, and consider if there is no pain nor swelling, nor is the bone broken and not displaced from its socket, then do not remove it for several days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if pain or swelling or inflammation occurs in the area, then cut or remove it in that moment and stop using the plaster.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	And take a piece of linen and sponge the wound with warm water, and wash the area with mild vinegar until the swelling and pain are relieved; then let the member rest for an hour; and then place clean wool soaked in sweet wine and oil or rose-colored oil over it overnight to prevent an abscess from forming on the wound, and let the inflammation of the member be eased.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat this gentle compression and small plaster again and not tighten it with your first compression, and use that until the wound is healed.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if the abscess and heat and pain and inflammation and all accidents are now relieved, and you have stopped using the plaster and compression as you did at first equally, then repeat that in the same way as before.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o .vii.; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if no accident occurs to the member of any of those that we have mentioned, then do not remove it but after three or four or five or seven days; and some times it is left for twenty days according to what appears through the loosening of the wound, as we have said, until the fracture has healed and the flesh draws close over it.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And then tighten the compression little by little but not as much as your first compression, and adjust the thickness of the padding according to how the wound is preceded in its memory.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	But if you see the area of the fracture dried and weakened but not closed, then know that food is prohibited from coming to it; and therefore moisten that with warm water after total washing of the wound; and let it be for three days; and loosen the compression a little, and through this operation feed the member, and it will heal quickly.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	But that which the unskilled restorers of the broken member do another washing when it is not healed at the beginning according to how it covers and is healed according to crookedness, is error according to their operation of them, and great fear, and if they would enlarge the ancient wounds in their sockets and were opened by them.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And I have not seen any of them do this, because it is more reasonable that this should not be done.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Chapter two: Of fractures when they occur on the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The kinds of fractures are many, and their shapes are diverse, and the causes are distinct, for any fracture is not caused by the impact of a staff, and the impact pierces all the bone into the brain, which is below the skull, as it does in the trunk, and through that this kind of fracture is named ascia; or the staff pierces one part of the bone, and pierces the flesh around it, and the incision does not pass through the bottom of it; and this kind of fracture is named absolute elevation.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the crack of these two fractures is large or small, and of the fracture that is compression or traction; and the cause of it is impact with a club or stone on stone, and to them alike.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture is penetrating that it approaches the membrane that is below the bone; or it is in the membrane of the bone, and the crack of these two fractures is large or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And of fracture that is worn away in the bone, in the thinness of the hair, and through that it is named this species fracture capillary.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And is fracture that is caused by stone or by impact of stone and to them alike, that makes any lamina of the bone enter into the fingernails, and it is made in the concave place thus as occurs on the fingers when impact and is broken from them.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	And this mostly happens in bodies of moist people, as well as children's heads.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And all these kinds of fractures are set, like separated stars.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And then you will have a memory of all this in your place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And recognize all these kinds of fractures by examination and by inquiry to those who have them, and by the appearance of decayed flesh that lies upon them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And hair is known because it is uncovered on the bone, and washed away, and when it is probed, the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	But in the treatment of fractures consider at first the accidents of the patient, and then if you see by these accidents what is significant through manifest indication, such as vomiting of cholera, and extension, and loss of understanding, and absence of voice, and fainting, and acute fever, and discharge from orifices and redness in those, and likenesses to them in the greater dispositions, it is not healed.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if you see accidents that do not run their course, then you expect health, then you begin the treatment of him.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	The reason for this is that if the afflicted has come to you in the beginning as he was afflicted and that is in the days of winter, then consider that you study in the appearance of the bone before the day fourteen according to all disposition.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is in the days of summer, then consider that you wait to splint the bone before the seventh day, having that which is beneath the bone be corrupted by the bandage, and that the accidents we have counted occur.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already reached the brain membrane and is in minute pieces and shattered, then consider that you insert the minute piece and shattered according to what I have told you.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And it is that you wash the head of the afflicted and uncover on the bone according to habit and manner to you possible according to the appearance of the plague, and that it be lighter upon the afflicted.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if it happens to you that you must make the detection of the bone, bleeding or pustule cautery, then you oppose to it with what is appropriate, and it is that you apply the place with clothes infused in wine and rose oil, and let the plague rest until the pustule is sedated, and you be secure from the flow of blood; and then begin at the circuit of the bone and in its ablation.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And that shall be according to one of two manners of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the first manner is that you insert the bone with an incision of strict suchness, and this is its form: And then administer another incision-maker this, a little wider than that; and this is its form:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And then administer more the incision-maker wider than the second.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And consider that there ought to be due to you number of incision-makers diverse, of which some are wider than others; and some of them are shorter than the others and are in the thickness of their extremities, and are of iron or bronze.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use them with facility in percussion upon the incision-maker so that it does not penetrate the head and lead to that.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is strong and hard, then consider that you pierce in the circuit of it before you administer the incision-makers with awls, which are named non-deepening awls.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And they are not named thus but because those do not pause the end of the bone at what is proper to it, so that to the awl there is rounded extremity or margin on that which is beneath the head of it acute resembling margin or small circle, which prohibits being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	And it is convenient that you take from these awls great number of which each convenes to the thickness of each bone, while being present in all tests of the brain whose extremity be acute, the quantity in length and brevity is according to the quantity of thickness of this test.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	And this is the form of three species of awls: The quality of drilling in the circuit of the broken bone is that you pause the awl over the bone and rotate it with your fingers while knowing that the bone is penetrated; and then change the awl to another place, and pause what is between all crack the quantity of the thickness of the thread or environment that.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And then insert with incision-makers what is between each crack of the bone, and make that more subtle than you can over what in end of levity, as we have said, while erradicating the bone, or by your hand, or by any other cause by some tools which you will have prepared to that, as with tongs and forceps subtle.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And consider that you keep with total caution so that the incision-maker does not touch any cause of the brain.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And then when you have pierced the bone and it is separated from the brain if it is continued with it, and you have that extracted, consider that you wash and gnaw it in its asperity of that which is in the bone with another tool resembling incision-maker, but indeed so that it be more thin and subtle than the other incision-makers.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if a part of the small bones and broken stars, then take that with facility with what is due to you of the tools; and then cure the plague with ointments and bandages which we have said.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the other manner of operation is gentler, farther from fear, which Gualia and the lauzec praise for great gain; and this is its speech: it is necessary to you in the beginning that you begin to uncover the part of the bone of the place in which is the fracture most violent and most manifest, while when you have uncovered that part and have paused beneath it the extremity of this incision-maker slow and gentle of which this is the form:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And the lenticular part is lion and does not insert any cause, and the acute part is of it in two sides forward in length, as you see; that the lenticular part be pressed to the brain with the membrane of it inserting acute into the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And then pierce upon the incision-maker of one part with a small hammer while you insert all the bone with facility as it is revolved, and you be secure of the bandage that no accident occur to it in any manner which you fear in any way, and if the patient was the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly, and if he was sleeping.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	Then if there is some cause attached to the bone of the bandage in any place of bone, insert that with its extremity of the incision-maker lenticular, and deliver that from it with facility, for it is delivered from it harm and fear.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate within the bandage, and what is severed or is left of the bone is the membrane of it, and you have in it asperity and minute stars, then consider that you wash that asperity and erradicating those stars with subtle razors by which you have prepared the number, of diverse quantities so that there be to you possible to administer of them in all places most convenient for them and most right of them according to what in which you are lost your operation that broken bone and the form of it.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And consider that you administer in your reason with which you are cutting the bone at the beginning the most wide of those razors, and then use next to it of the most subtle of them, and do not cease doing that according to continuity while you come to administer the most thin and the most subtle of all those.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	But in any other small capillary fractures and subtle fractures, you must administer treatment according to what is lost to restore him.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And it is caused by not being healed above all those who have studied that art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And this is about what we wrote to show in great fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the skin is stretched when you extract the bone, then take a cloth according to the amount of wound, and dip that in rose oil, and place it over the hole of the wound; and take another folded or doubled cloth, and dip it in wine and rose oil, and place it on top of the first cloth, and do this to the pus as gently as you can so that it does not hurt the head; and then apply lamb's wool over it, and do not tighten it except for the amount that the wound is.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And let him stay with this treatment for a day or two until you are sure of the cauterized wound; and then loosen it, and administer medicines that cause superficial dryness, such as linen rags and wheat flour, and powder of fennel and of aristology, and similar to these.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And it is that you make of these medicines a powder that is sprinkled over the wound, as they are dry; and generally, administer in him all medicine of the property of which is that cleanses and does not bite.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And keep yourself according to your virtue that the wound in your treatment is clean; and let there be no filth of ointment or other in it; nor let you add virulence in him; for when it is applied on the skin of the brain, it corrupts him and causes him harm, and happens on the patient an evil malice.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And it happens in the head, as they are cleansed of the bone and most when the cure is lessened, and blackness in its surface; and therefore consider if these accidents happen to the patient that we have said, know that it is poisonous without doubt.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas .iii., e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if blackness does not happen except from the medicine that is placed over it, and it is in the virtue of that medicine that makes that blackness, then take honey a part, and rose oil parts iii., and with these line the cloth, and then place it over the head; and then cure that with the spices of cure that you consider until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter iii.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	Of the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	Know that the nose is not broken except into two parts above all, or one of those some few times, because in it there are two bones, because the part below is cartilaginous, and it is not broken, and nothing happens to it except compression and crookedness and sinusitis.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	But if one of the two parts of it is broken, then you must put your little finger into his nose, and close that fracture inside with your index finger, and with your thumb push outward, until the nose returns according to its natural figure.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And do this by you with facility, and keep yourself that it does not hurt because of your operation on the patient.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the highest part of the nose, and the finger does not reach it, then let it be applied with the extremity of the rod in which there is a small thickness.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in two parts, then you do that.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And cauterize it for restoration in the first day of the fracture, if possible; and if not, then you must let him rest the cauterized wound for seven days.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And then put into the extremity of the nose a plug of linen cloth, if the fracture is in one part, or put two pegs if the fracture is in two parts, and let there be thickness in the peg of as much quantity that fills the hole of the nose.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And some of the ancient restorers said that the pegs be immersed in vinegar, and changed every day, but I have not seen it; they say that the plug be immersed in honeycombed vinegar with powdered mill; and then let the peg stay until the bone is healed and the cartilage hardened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And sometimes it is inserted in the nose, instead of peg, a peacock feather that is wrapped in linen lion cloth; and let there be the fracture of the nose more violent and that the patient not be prohibited from breathing.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	And this cause is not necessary for you; and if you want, do it, and if you want, make pegs.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if another cauterized wound happens, plaster the nose with cerote or with a poultice soaked in wine and rose oil, or with diaquilon.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	But if there is no cauterized wound, then plaster that outward with sesame flour and fennel powder cooked in honey; and then place a lion's tongue over it, and do not put the nose to any cause.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	But if the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or crushed, then split those, and extract them with instruments that are appropriate for them; and then sew the split, and cure that with what encapsulates and consolidates it, and with plasters that are appropriate.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	And if a wound happens inside the nose, then cure that with pegs and administer lead tubes until it is completely healed.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter iv.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	Of the restoration of the jaw when it is broken.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the lower jaw is broken and the fracture of it does not have wound, consider then if the fracture is outward only, and is not broken in two and bent at its parts within, then its diagnosis is easy.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	And therefore, if the fracture is on the right part, put your left index finger into the patient's mouth; and likewise if the fracture is on the left side of the jaw, then put in the mouth with the index finger of the right hand; and push by that the flexibility of the fracture within with facility to its parts outward, with the other hand from the part of the bone; and by that it is equalized that.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two parts, then administer the extension of both parts according to its rightness so that it is possible to equalize them.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if there is a concussion of teeth to disruption, then strengthen those with wires that will break with thread of gold or silver, or with thread of silk; and then place over the broken jaw cerote, and then place over it doubled cloth, and place over the cloth a great star decently made, or a bandage single lengthwise of the jaw; and then tie that over so that you have the fastening of it prepared and that it is appropriate to its application, until it is not ruined.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And command the patient to have rest and tranquillity, and feed him with wine and soft foods.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you see that the figure is altered in any way, then take it off and loose that on the third day; and then rectify what has been altered of it, and plaster that with sesame flour, with honeycombed vinegar, or with flour of cress, after you have removed the cerote from it, and place over the plaster linen cloth.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And then after that and the adjustment of that plaster over it, and the disposition of the bone is not altered, leave it, that it does not loosen until it is healed and the fracture is strong; for many times this fracture is tight in three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if another vesicle occurs with pus, then administer what we have said about many vesicles in the sedation of him so that he may heal and the pus be expelled.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is a wound, then consider whether it is a heavy bone separated or shattered, then you subtlety that hold those shards with what is convenient to that in the removal of those with instruments.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the opening of the wound is narrow, then you enlarge it with phlebotomy according to the quantity of your need.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	Then, when you have held those shards, and some do not bleed out, then you close the opening of the wound if it is large; and if not, place one of the ointments that are convenient to that and bandage that up, so that it may be healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	Of the restoration of the collarbone when it is broken.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	Many times the collarbone in front of the chest is broken by a blow, and that fracture is done in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	Because it is broken, or separated, or separated into two parts other than that do not occur vesicles; and it is easier to restore it; or it is so that vesicles occur in it, and it is difficult to restore; or the fracture is a wound.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And the operation in that, when the fracture is a wound, is that you have two assistants, so that one has the assistant and follows the collarbone broken, and the other stretches out the neck while that part is broken.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	Then splint the fracture with your fingers until it is made in its form according to how it covers, and there be no slight eminence or concavity in it.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if you need more extension, then have a cotton or woolen cloth placed beneath the neck of the patient, and let the size of it be according to the quantity of your need; and extend and elevate the collarbone and constrict the cloth with your hand so that you may splint the fracture as it covers.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot bring the extremity of the collarbone to the parts forward, because it is come to the breast bone, then have the patient reclined on his neck, and place a cushion half in size over the muscle of him.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the assistant press the muscle of him to the parts below so that the bone of the collarbone be elevated which is in the breast bone above it, and then you correct the fracture and splint it with your fingers.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	But if you feel vesicles of the collarbone and they are not healed, then have you split that open and drawn out those vesicles with facility.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is retained in the bone, then you devise an incision of it with one of the knives which you have apparelled for that, after you had placed beneath the collarbone the instrument that serves the head; and the instrument is of wood or iron, of which this is the form of it:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And it is like a chisel of which this is the concavity; and let its breadth be according to what you have need of it, according to the greatness of the bone or the fragility of it.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	But let its length be according to that it is possible for you in the operation; that it have two extremities thus with points, and one extremity be ample and the other narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the opening of the wound which you have split when you have drawn out the pus of the bone is ample, and it seems sure of pus, then you adjust the two lips of the wound with a suture.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the opening is slight, or you fear pus, then you fill the wound with clothes and powders according to the quantity of the opening of the wound.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if pus occurs, then moisten a cloth in wine and rose oil and vinegar, and place it over that.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	But the constriction of the bone when it is without wound and without section is that you place a plaster made of wheat flour with white egg, and place over it a stopa of lion, and then place the cloth beneath the neck of him, if he needs it; and then take humamate, so is the which they hold the Sarrazis , let its length be one palm or around that; and then place powders doubled over the stopa and the plaster; and then take a table-stick of which the breadth be of three fingers and in length likewise; and then wrap up that in cloth, and then wrap that cloth with the stick in the part of the fracture; and then take the humemate as is turned around, and place it over his neck and beneath the neck of him, and reduce that to every part, and when the constriction of the fracture with constriction descends, and that is which does not hide under you.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And all that the plaster be not healed over the broken bone; and so have you look at the patient every day, for when the bandage is softened or you see the plaster already healed, then you correct that and tighten the bandage.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And then place the pillow of him over his neck, and place beneath the neck of him due to the pillow of him in the night a little cushion; so that with that be elevated the support of him from the side of that, and thus is elevated the fracture of the collarbone at elevation of the muscle; or let his arm be bound to his neck.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not loosen the bandage if pus does not occur in the place or very much, until twelve days have passed.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And then renew the plaster if you have seen his face to that, and adjust in constriction and restore that, and leave it until it is restored and the fracture of the collarbone is coagulated.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it is tightened and comforted according to the moon in twenty-eight days, and some times in some men it is done in less time than that.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter 6.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the shoulder.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The spatula is broken in the broad place of it and not broken of it but its margins.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And then when it is broken in the place of it — and it is broken in the middle place of it — and it is not congealed except by touch, then according to that the figure of the fracture is bent have you the preparation of it and reduce that according to the natural figure in every manner of engine which it is possible for you.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	And then place over the place powder of wheat flour with white egg and stopa lion; and then place doubled cloth of wool; and then place over it a table-stick of wood subtle according to the quantity of the spatula whole or but little.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	But if beneath the stick is concavity in any of the places of the spatula, then you splint that concavity with stopa lion, and then set the stick according to equality.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And then tighten above with a long humamate with decent constriction and with firmness of the stick so that it is not healed in its place.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And consider the bandage every day; and all times that it is softened, loosen another time and tighten it and adjust the stick if it is healed in its place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And support him on his side.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	And the spatula is restored in twenty days or less than that.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And then when it is completed that number, then you dissolve the bandage, and so you know it to be assured that that of the bones of which the beginning is not feared nor its dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you process the area of the foot and place a chain underneath it, then you split it, and bind it, and do as we have said in the fracture of the clavicle of an aposteme if it occurs here.
Capitol .vii.	Here is the translation of the provided text:
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	Here is the translation:
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	Here is the translation:
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	Here is the translation:
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	Here is the translation:
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	Here is the translation:
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	Here is the translation:
Capitol .viii.	Here is the translation:
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	Here is the translation:
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	Here is the translation:
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	Here is the translation:
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	Here is the translation:
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	Here is the translation:
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	Here is the translation:
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	Here is the translation:
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	Here is the translation:
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	Here is the translation:
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	Here is the translation:
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	Here is the translation:
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	Here is the translation:
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	Here is the translation:
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	Here is the translation:
Capitol .ix.	Here is the translation:
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	Here is the translation:
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Here is the translation:
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And when this happens to someone and you want to know if they will be healed or not, then consider that if you see their feet already softened and stupified and dead and cannot move them or stretch them or strengthen them, and when you pinch or prick them with a needle and they feel no pain in them, then know that they are not healed and in the most part this is deadly.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if they feel a constriction in them when you pinch or prick, then know that the joint of the bone is saved and that the patient will be healed with treatment.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you see something similar in the spine of the neck and want to know if it will be healed or not, then consider his feet.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	Then if you see that they are already softened, approach the one who is affected in his hands, and when he lies on his back, he has flatulence and involuntary defecation, and sometimes he lies on his back and wants to urinate but cannot, then know that it is deadly, and so you should not treat him.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	But if you see no cause for these things, the cause is better and soon removed.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And the treatment for him is that you pierce the swelling of the joint with a cautery needle, either by rubbing it with rose oil or with the seeds of hellebore; place it over the joint several times a day while the swelling is settling.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And then place one of the comforting and soothing plasters on it, and strengthen the area with a bandage; and command the patient to take rest and tranquility, and not to sleep on the side that causes pain until he is healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that the bone is separated from it due to some cause, then cover the wound with a bandage and bind that bone; and if it is large, sew the two lips of the wound closed; and then treat it with some healing ointment until it is healed.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	But if the back end of the bone is broken and it is the end of the tailbone, then insert your left thumb into the anus, and bite the broken bone with your other hand as hard as you can by applying a second force; and then place a plaster on it, if necessary, and splint it.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel broken bones in him, then open it up, and immobilize that part, and heal the wound with the treatment that is described until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De restauracio de la ancha.	On the restoration of the jaw.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the jaw are very fragile, and if they break, then their fracture is usually in their extremities and they bend towards the inner parts; and when this happens, the patient feels pain in the area and a constriction, and the jaw is stunned when it is fractured.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And its restoration is that you extend your hand over it so that it is above the fracture, whatever its shape is.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	And if the fracture is only in its extremity, then bite it according to how it appears to you through another bite that is aligned with its natural shape.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	But if the fracture is in its length or declining towards the jaw, then make the patient lie on his stomach so that you are prepared to restore that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And when you have bitten it, place a plaster on it, and then place a splint made of wood or sinew over it, and bind it tightly; do not be afraid of the fracture piercing through or the removal of the splint.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And bite the cavity with what fills it so that the jaw takes on the binding equally; and command the patient to sleep on his back or on his side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	But if you see swelling, then cease from extending it and restoring it until the swelling is settled, and place on it what was described earlier; and then return to its restoration, and bind it thus with what covers it.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if you see them in the bones or they are crushed, then treat them.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	On the restoration of the fracture of the elbow.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	The elbow is what is between the arm and the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is broken, then its restoration is in one of two ways, and the first is that you take a piece of wood from an elm tree that is as thick as your thumb, shaped like this:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And let there be ligatures on both ends of two lengths, and let it be suspended from the elevated position.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And let the patient lie on his back; and then bend his broken arm over the wood so that it comes to rest at the tip of it in the middle part from which the curve of the wood is attached.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And then suspend some heavy weight over it, or let the servant extend that to the sides below; and let the doctor then press the fracture with his hands, so that the fracture returns as it should.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And the other way is that the patient lies on his neck and suspends the arm of his elbow by a bandage; and then command two servants, one of whom holds what is over the fracture with his hands, and the other the heel of him; and each of them extends to his side.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want the extension to be stronger, then bind the fracture with a bandage and also with another bandage over it, and each of the two servants extend to their two sides.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And if the fracture is close to the extremity of the muscle, then let half of the bandage be over the tip and the other below the fracture towards the arm.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And similarly if the fracture is close to the bone, then you must place a ligament over that spot and on that bone.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Gargle it with ease and without trouble, and then once the wound is sewed up according to how it should be and is applied properly, then strengthen it if an abscess does not occur.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	But if an abscess does occur, then loosen the bandage on the sixth day, and place soft wool soaked in warm wine and rose oil over the abscess so that it drains, and then strengthen the wound afterward.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	And the way to strengthen it is to place a plaster over the fracture and then a new drape over the plaster, and then lean your arm on that support and hold your open hand over the muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And place the drape and strengthen it over the support of the arm so that the arm is in place of the splint if no other cause from the broken bone prohibits it.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	Then use a splint.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And you must place over the fracture the splint that is wider and stronger than the other splints; and place between each splint the width of a finger, and let the length of the splints be according to the break with an addition of three fingers all divided.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And then strengthen over the splints the bandage which was mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And you must make your bandage over the site of the fracture tighter.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And when the fracture is longer, then make the bandage smaller.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And therefore if you see the placement of the splints and the bandage as we have said in the hour when you are restoring the member to its position then do so.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear an abscess will occur, then loosen the bandage and the splints on the sixth day as we have said.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And then consider the ligament in all directions for three days so that no inflammation or swelling occurs in the area, and thus food is prohibited from coming to the member due to excess of bandage; and then rectify all of this according to what we have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	But if you are sure that no such cause will occur, then do not loosen the bandage but rather for three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And let the patient's bed be on his back, and his hands over his stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And place over the support a pillow filled with wool soaked, and consider at all times during the night or day that the figure of the broken member is not distorted or dissolved nor the ligament softened; therefore rectify all this with your skill.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And let the patient's food be according to the order we have mentioned before, so that the food is subtle at the beginning until it is started strengthening; and then you must thicken the food for him.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	Because it is customary for the support and the bed to be made tighter for forty days, then loosen them and give a bath and medicine to soothe the area which rectify it.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is loose, then you must not loosen that ligament and splints until ten days or two months have passed.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter 12.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	Of restoration of a broken arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	An arm is composed of two bones which are called the two bones of the forearm; one of which is small and is that which the thumb pushes, and the other is large and is that which is placed below the small one in the part further down.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And often only the larger bone is broken, or the smaller one, and often both are broken at once.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when the smaller bone is broken on top, then its restoration is easier, and its healing is even easier.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when it is broken below, the fracture is bad, and its healing is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And even worse than that is when both bones are broken at once.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore if the bone that is broken is the smaller one on top, then it is convenient for the doctor, when restoring it, to make a small extension with ease so that it is soaked.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	But if the larger bone is what is broken, then you must make an even more forceful extension.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both bones are broken at once, then you must make the extension with the most force.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And you must make the position of the hand for its restoration and extension extended over one pillow, and let the wrist of the hand be above the parts on top, more out than all the other fingers, and let the thumb be more down than the other fingers, and let the patient lie on his back with a pillow under him.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And let one pillow be in front of him in the height or bent toward him so that he does not strain himself too much.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	And then the assistant extends the arm of the part further down with his hand or with a ligament, and another assistant extends it above similarly.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	And then the doctor soaks the bone so that he reduces it according to the best figure that he can.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if there is swelling in the bone, then you pierce through it with your skill to reduce all pressure in its place.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if there appears a separate swelling that presses against the tendon and you do not hope in its restoration, then cut it off and treat it according to the way we have said above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	But if the fracture is with pus, I have already made that particular chapter and therefore take its cure.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration then you cut a cloth with a kerchief made from warm oil and white wax, and let it be moderate between thickness and subtlety, and strengthen the bandage over that with a gentle tightness so that the abscess drains; then remove the kerchief and place a plaster prepared from powder of millers' flour and honey, and then place splints; and let the splint which is placed over that fracture be wider and stronger.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And know that the number of an arm's splints are seen in the most dispositions, or let the fracture be in one bone or both bones at once.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	And then strengthen your bandage over the site of the fracture with great force and violence, and when you loosen the extension at the parts on top of the fracture or at the lower parts of him, loosen the bandage a little softer according to how it is preceded in the beginning of the chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the bandages which are wrapped around the fracture be soft, moistened cloths and not hard or rough, and let the thread by which it is tightened be of linen thread and not hemp thread, as we have recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	And consider the member after a few days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if any cause occurs which requires rectification, then you immerse the member in warm water so that it stops that swelling.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And let the member not be bent while it rests, and then tighten the bandage again.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the extension is already softened and the bone is healed and similar to those, then rectify all that with your skill.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And consider also if food is prohibited from coming to the member due to excess of bandage, then soften it a little and let it stay for several days so that food comes to it, then strengthen it.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	But if the patient does not experience any of the causes that we have said, then do not loosen it for about 20 days or from those times on.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And then let the patient's hand be suspended by its skill of movement, and let him sleep on his back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	And know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or in 32 days, or at the very least it is restored in 28 days, and all of this is according to the disposition of the complexities and the dispositions of nature.
Capitol .xiii.	Here is the next sentence:
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	Here is the translation:
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	Know that in the tips of the hands and the knuckles of the fingers there can be fractures, and they do not occur often but many times.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when a fracture or sprain occurs in the hand, then have the patient lie on his back and denant, and place your hand over that which is extended.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	Then the minister extends the broken bones and the doctor applies an ointment to those places where there are wounds, with good conjunction.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And then have him apply a plaster and bandage, unless there is an abscess, cauterize it; and then place a poultice over that according to the quantity of the wound, and you have already wrapped that in cloth.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	But if the cut is on the edges within the palm of the hand, then make a bandage out of cloth, and command the patient to hold that with his palm cut; then let it be held with long cloth.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And let the poultice of skin be with cloth in which is raised, so that the skin is applied to the palm; and hold that according to how it is needed.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	But if the fracture is on the outer edges, then place over that poultice and another poultice from the edge below in the palm, so that the hand is open and straight; and then apply the bandage, as well as how the hand is rolled between the fingers with ligaments.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	And if a fracture occurs on one of the knuckles of the fingers, then if it is the thumb, let it be anointed according to how it is needed and then let it be bandaged with the palm, and if you wish, place a small straight splint so that the fracture is elevated and not bruised.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	But if the fracture is on one of the other fingers, as well as in that of the middle finger, or the index finger, or the ring finger, or the little finger, then let it be anointed and bound with the finger with which it is attached; or they are all bound according to continuation, and that is better; or place a small splint over that, as we have said in the thumb.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider, in your restoration, and especially that, the disposition of abscess cauterization — with your operation — with what it is needed when any cause of those occurs, according to how it is narrated about him.
Capitol .xiv.	Here is the next sentence:
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	Of the restoration of a fracture of the tip of the toe and of the toes.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The bones of the thigh many times are broken and it is declared to the feeling according to how it is converted to the front and to the upper pus.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	And its restoration is done so that the ligament is bandaged over the fracture and another ligament below the fracture, and the patient lies on his belly and on his face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	Then the minister extends all the ligament to its part according to quality when the fracture is in the middle place of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	But if it is near the root of the thigh, then let the ligament be towards the inside at the part of the armpit, so that the extension boxes in it, and the other ligament below the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And similarly if the cut is near the armpit, then let the ligament be towards the inside and let the extension be at the parts below.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And then the doctor anoints the bone with both of his hands inside so that he reduces it according to the natural semblance and the bone is joined by good conjunction; then have him apply a plaster and bandage, unless there is an abscess on the member.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	But if there occurs on him an abscess, then let him leave that for several days until the abscess cauterization is completed, and then return to your cure.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The bandage of him is done thus: have a hard bandage wrapped over the fracture, and fold that two or three times, and remove from him superfluous moisture; and then wrap the leg so that it comes to the ankle and to the root of the thigh.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And insert long felt between the thigh and the leg near to the armpit at the parts below, and let the ends of the felt come from the uppermost part of the two parts, and then roll over the leg and the thigh that which is superfluous of the bandage.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And then place splints on the thigh at the site of that fracture and place one of those splints over the bone of the leg.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	And then fill the vacancies between the leg and the thigh with soft cloths so that the bandage is coagulated.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And then begin with a strong bandage over the site of the fracture with three or four wrappings, and as many as you lengthen with ligament of the site of the fracture, your bandage be lesser and looser and moister.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	And then extend the two ends of the felt to the parts below so that it comes to the ankle of the foot, and band both ends of the splints on the other side so that the ligament is not loosened from its place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And then let him lie on that, where there is no occurrence of corrosion or abscess cauterization or swelling and similar to those; and if any cause of those occurs, then treat him with dismemberment of it, and correct what has occurred altogether, according to how we have said many times.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	But if there is pus of the bone which is poured out, then have you anoint that according to what is possible for you; and if not, fain over it and remove it, and cure with that from which preceded the remembrance by which it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And some times this fracture of the thigh is bandaged with another one that are attached to him, as we have said in the helper and in the arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	But in its restoration in such a manner made, there does not occur to the patient claudication; and if it is restored alone, then let the other leg be applied to which the other thigh is attached, then it is necessary that he limp that one from which it occurs temporarily.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And know that the thigh is bandaged for 40 days or one month or one month and a few days, and all of this is according to the variety of the complexities and the other dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Here is the next sentence:
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	Of the restoration of a fracture of the bone of the armpit.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	Know that fracture of the armpit occurs many times, but there also occurs to it many times sprain.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	But if there occurs to it fracture, then it is not except crack or break in its parts, and that is with pain or numbness, and over that all is as it is felt.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And its restoration is thus that it is anointed that which is broken of the parts of it with the fingers so that it is attached and conjoined according to what is possible by equation and facility and fabrication.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	And then have him apply a plaster and place over that a round splint if it is needed from that; and band over that with a bandage as is convenient.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	And then consider all the dispositions which we have recommended in other fractures, as well as how there is abscess cauterization and similar to those in which there occurs to all accident with that which is convenient to him so that he is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	On the restoration of a broken leg.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	Know that in the leg there are two bones of which one is thick and is named after the name of the leg; and the other is thin, and is called the tibia.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And it happens to both types of fracture that happen in the leg what happens to the two bones of the arm, and therefore the restoration of it is the same as the restoration of the arm in every way; and the operation of it is one.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if both bones are broken together, the leg is turned into many pieces.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if the thinner bone is broken, the leg is turned to the back.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if the thicker bone is broken, bend that one downward, and it is of those causes that are not to you known.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	And then administer extension and position and strapping of the splints according to that same way.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	But however, if the fracture of the leg is loose having many little bones, then the extension should be less and closer, and you should move with your virtue.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And in the leg there is some cause of operation over the arms, and it is when you align the splints and complete all your operation; then you will take weights of wood which is placed beneath the causes which are placed in soles, and they are made equally of white of palm; ligate those of which are small thickness, and not be of the fingers, and let the length of those according to the length of the leg, and of the toe into the most bottom.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And then wrap around each cloth in two wraps according to the length of it; and pause one over the part of the leg on one side and the other on the other side, and let them be from within to the most bottom place of the foot.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	And then tie the two splints in three places of two extremes and in the middle place, for with this tightness the leg is prohibited from leaning to the right and left part, and stands in good position.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And then is administered a staff of wood according to the length of the leg; and let it be paused on it the leg so that it conserve that from movement.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And especially you do that in fracture, and when it has been properly healed.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And then consider each day the leg and study with that by last study, and you keep it from pustule and inflammation or other similar causes; and when any cause of those happens, then pause yourself to it with what is necessary for it to be healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	Of fractures of the talus and bones of the foot and toes.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	The talus does not often sustain a fracture; but fractures of the bones of the foot occur frequently; and fractures of the toes are uncommon, and do not occur unless there is some defect in the structure.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if there is a fracture of the bones of the foot and these bones are displaced, so that they project beyond one another, then let the patient place his foot on the ground prepared as before.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	Then let him put his weight upon that foot which is raised by the displaced bones; then let him press and crush and draw these back into their sockets.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	And let an ointment be applied to this, and let the swelling below the foot be bound with a bandage which has two small pieces of wood attached to it at one end.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	And then strengthen that foot with a splint, because you have bound it up in bandages and other remedies.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	After three or four days have passed, then take off the ligature; for you will find the bones displaced, or broken, or dislocated, and the operation in such cases is the same as that already described.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	But if some toes are broken, then restore these; draw them together and bind them as before in the restoration of the fingers of the hand.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	And for the broken toe, apply a splint according to its length; and let it be bound so that there is a little space between each toe; then below the foot, apply this bandage as before, and strengthen the toe with a ligature.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	But if there are two or three or more broken bones, then apply to each toe a splint of its own size wrapped in linen; and strengthen the bandage at the lowest part of the foot so that it stands upon one end of the splint, allowing room for the foot to move freely.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And you should not forget that in all cases you should observe the causes which have been stated before concerning the other fractures, and apply remedies according to the case.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	Of fractures of the pubic bone, the shin-bone and the staff of man.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When there is a fracture of the pubic bone, let her lie on her side with a pillow between her legs; then let her lean forward slightly, and let her be supported from behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And let the midwife fill up the pubic bone with her finger, and let it be done in the same way as in the case of a woman who has not yet given birth; then let the woman be pressed, and lifted up little by little so that everything may return to its natural position, and the broken bone may come back into its socket.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And let powder be applied to her back; and when she wants to urinate, let the pubic bone be pressed gently so that she may pass water easily; then reduce it and bring it back again according to the method by which you found it at first; then bring it back to its former position.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And do this for seven days or about that time, for then it will be restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you wish, take a bladder of an ox and strengthen it with a tube of reed; then insert the whole bladder into her pubic bone, and when the bladder is inflated inside her pubic bone, the fracture will return.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And let it be filled up, and let it stay for a few days according to our recommendation, until she is healed.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when there is a fracture of the shin-bone in man or woman, then administer remedies and punctures as we have recommended for a fracture of the hip-bone.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And that which is straight is not hidden in these fractures, and there is no need of any special study or understanding to read this book; for it explains clearly the remedies for such fractures, and therefore one can understand them well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	But when there is a fracture of the staff in man, take a piece of white poplar-wood and put it in the staff; then apply a bandage of linen over it, and let it be wrapped up and left for three days or about that time, and it will be healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	Of the restoration of fractured bones when they are swollen.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient for one who has a fracture and swelling that the bone should be large like the bone of the thigh or arm, or similar to it, so that you may be careful and apply bloodletting as we have stated before.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the swelling flows away from the fracture, then beware that you make the bloodletting at the point of retention as we have said before, unless some other cause is present.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And let the fracture be restored on that same day; do not prolong it, unless suppuration occurs.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	But if suppuration occurs, let the restoration of the fracture be delayed until the tenth day, or even later, for then the suppuration will cease; and do not apply remedies on the third and fourth days, for otherwise you will cause bad accidents.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	But if the fractured bone projects beyond the skin which covers it, then beware that you draw it back and bring it together with your hands gently and with little extension.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	But if extension is not prepared and the position of the bone by your hands, then reduce it with your hands gently and with little extension; there is a tool made of iron, the length of which is seven digits or eight, and the breadth according to the amount of swelling; this is necessary for the surgeon to take from those three or four, according to the quantity needed in all kinds of fractures.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And let it be round and not bent, so that it may not be doubled by the pressure upon it in the hour of operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And let its end be pointed and the edge bent inwards so that it tends towards the middle of the bone.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is the form of it:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	And in Greek it is named "labrys vulturis", and it is a little palette.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	So beware that the pointed end of the instrument be elevated above the projecting bone.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And push it into a wound until the bone returns, and let it be brought together in some position.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And therefore press the ends of the fracture together, and if the end of the broken bone is thin and the instrument cannot be inserted easily, then beware that you do not push the end of the bone in so as to injure it.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	But if you cannot reduce the bone at all as we have recommended, then insert it into that which is suitable to it of the incisions which we have mentioned; or saw it with one of the saws in any way that it is possible for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	And let it be rubbed with something which has been ground on the bone which is rough and covered with minute scars.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone is reduced, and as soon as the reduction causes violent pain in cutting, then know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; therefore do this so that you confer great benefit to him.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When you have completed your restoration of the bone, then immerse the linen in wine which is black and sharp; and properly if it is summer, do not apply oil nor any other cause to it above the swelling, so that no putrefaction or corruption may occur in it.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And then administer stars at the time of your Compliment of the restoration of the bone, and let the wound remain uncovered so that you may apply the traction with tweezers and bandages according to the amount of the wound.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And be very careful not to tighten the wound with the fracture, because many times the foolish doctors have done this and caused death or harm to their patients, which is unsanitary.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if the tightness is lighter, softer, and different from the tightness of other fractures, then:
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the wound is large or a bad wound, and you fear any of those bad incidents that we have listed, and there is pain in the area, then do not place stars on it, but instead make a bandage of tough cloth over the area and tighten it with those.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And when a day or two has passed and the wound has started to heal and there is some inflammation, then remove the cloth that you had placed over it and apply hot poultices, according to our custom of treating wounds, as well as tetrafarmacon and similar things.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	And it is fitting for you to loosen the bandage and examine the wound every day morning and evening until it is consolidated and closed, and ensure that the limb is prepared in such a way that the pus flows from it to the parts below with ease.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If many days pass and the wound is not consolidated or the inflammation does not go away, then know that there are small holes here for which you should open the wound with a tent.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And of those holes that are separated and remain open, if the member does not heal and causes pain, then pierce them according to what is possible for you.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	And if the wound turns black or green, or there is another type of decay or corruption, then do what is appropriate for each one according to the cure that is preceded by a description in its chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o .xxx.; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And from this point on, you should take care with your own words and present your argument: when the bone is broken, it protrudes over the limb like the bone of the thigh and the helper, and similarly for those of the large limbs, and do not assume attraction or extraction of it, for many times death occurs because of this; let there be no incisions for it to pus out, for it will fall on its own after about 20 or 30 days. And then heal the wound if you have seen it, and if not, leave it.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter .XX.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	Of the cure of a knot that occurs in the path of any fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Many times this knot occurs in the path of healing from a fracture, especially near the joints, and it is visible as a shape on the limb; and very often it prohibits the limb from its natural operation.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Therefore, consider if the knot is recent and administer to it medicines that have dried, like aloes, and myrrh, and mirra, and seseli, and similar things; take some or all of them and mix with wine vinegar, or egg white, or vinegar, and apply that on the knot in a piece of cloth, and tie it around tightly.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	Let the tightness remain for several days, and then loosen it and repeat this, while the knot is being soaked; or tighten a piece of lead over it inclined downward, because lead has the property of soaking up anything that is inflamed in the limbs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if the knot has already turned to stone and is tight, and it necessitates being cut open painfully, then split it from its highest pus-filled part, and cut out the surplus and prominent part, or pierce it with some resoring agent so that it may be soaked; and heal what was healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter .XXI.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	Of the restoration of a fracture when it is restored and then the limb becomes weak and frail, not according to its nature.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture is restored, and then the limb becomes weak and frail, this does not happen for no reason: one cause is excess of inflammation of the ligament and of its binding made not according to how it should be; or due to excess tightness of the ligaments, preventing nourishment from running to the limb; or due to excess of superfluous heat; or due to superfluous movement at an improper time; or due to lack of blood in the patient's body and debility of it.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	And the cure for this is to make the patient eat and soften his heart so that blood multiplies in him; and administer a bath; and apply fomentation and lettuce over it.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	And then place a poultice on the limb so that the poultice attracts much nourishment to it, or continue fomentation of it with warm water, until the nourishment runs and it returns to its natural shape.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter .XXII.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	Of the cure of broken bones when they are restored crookedly and prohibit their operation from what they should do.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When it happens to the limb already restored that there is healing of crookedness and prominence in the broken bone and knot, and it is fed by the form of the limb, but yet the limb is not prohibited from its natural operation, then do not believe the word of one who examines that limb as though it were newly broken.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	But many foolish doctors and restorers have done this in our land; and this operation is very blameworthy and presents great danger, the sign of which is deadly.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	But if claudication and knot are recent, then let them be fomented with warm water in which soft herbs are boiled, like leaves of poplar tree and roots of it, and mallow, and similar things; or let there be a plaster made with emollient ointment like white lead well made; or let there be a mucilage of root of poplar tree and let it be rubbed with grease of linseed oil, or let there be a plaster made with that; or let them be bound with fat figures and bound with cotton threads, and similar things to those medicines which are named as brothers' consolations.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And sometimes it is dissolved by constant gentle friction that is made with moist hands, and let the limb be moved to all parts at all hours.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	But if crookedness has gone before and is made strong and turned to stone and necessitates cure by iron, then let the pus be above dried up and the continuation of the bone be dissolved, and what superfluity of knot from that doctors with subtle tools, and let ease be administered to it with solicitude and study.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter .XXIII.
De sermo en dislocacio.	Of speech in dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is separation of one of the joints of its place, by which it is prohibited from motion, and the figure of the limb is disturbed, and it brings great pains and injuries to the patient.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore when dislocation occurs, then let it be reduced as soon as possible, and do not delay reducing it, because if it is delayed, the place is pustularized and very difficult to reduce the dislocation.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And for that reason, let it not be soaked or stretched in the time of pustulation because many times it brings spasms and pains.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	But when that happens, then let you examine the flabosity of the patient, and then let it be left so that pus is discharged from the pustule; and then let the limb be fomented with warm water and oil, and then let it be reduced with ease.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And all parts should be treated with water from which memory will return to its place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And I have already ordered the chapters on dislocation according to what is preceded in fracture; from the highest part of the body down to the lowest part.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter 24.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	On the treatment of dislocation of the lower jaw.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	The two jaws are dislocated if it does not bite; and the dislocation of both is done in one of two ways: they are either slightly loosened from their joints and slightly softened, or they are fully dislocated and completed, provided that they are softened at the joint where saliva flows from the patient's mouth and he cannot hold it closed, and his tongue is wrapped in a cloth.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	But when the dislocation of it is slight, then in most cases it will return on its own for some slight cause.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	But if the dislocation is entire and complete, then it must be reduced quickly without delay at all.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And it is that the minister hold the patient' head, and let the doctor insert his finger of one hand into the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the patient's mouth, if the dislocation is on one side; or that he insert both fingers together, if the dislocation is on two sides, and let the others hands be outside holding him; and command the patient to cease clenching his jaws and release them in any way; and the doctor should grip the jaw and press it in until it returns to its place.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if the reduction of it is difficult, and especially if both jaws are fully dislocated, then administer evaporation with hot water and oil, so that the reduction of both is made easier and do not delay the reduction of both at all, as we have said.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And when they are returned and bound, and the patient's mouth is closed and not softened, then place over them a poultice of linen with cerot, made of wax and oil heated; and let it be bound easily with soft bandages.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And let the patient sleep on his back, and let his head be between two pillows, so that he does not clench his jaws to the right or left; and do not force him to chew anything for any reason; let his food be soft meat, so that when the pains are lessened and the jaws are numbed, then he may chew whatever he wants.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And let this be administered with ease, and do not work on the opening of the mouth after eating and drinking and speaking, until the jaw is numbed and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if the reduction of two jaws when they are dislocated at any time is difficult and not returned to their places, then many times there occur fever and continuous sweating, and very soon the belly of the patient is swollen, and very soon he vomits pure phlegm.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you see this, then know that it is a loss; and many times he who has this dies within ten days.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	On the reduction of the dislocation of the collarbone and the extremity of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The collarbone is not dislocated on the inside due to its continuation with the shoulder; and sometimes it is dislocated at the outer end, and this is declared by feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And its restoration is that the patient chews on his back and extends his arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	Then grip the joint tightly with your palm, for it will return.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And let a plaster and powder be placed over it and strengthen that.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	But the extremity of that which connects to the head and is continued with it, is not dislocated in any day; then let it be reduced and bound according as we have said and as you are equipped.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And let a plaster, powder, and bandage be placed over it, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until he is healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And with this method of treatment, the extremity of the muscle is reduced when separated from its place.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	On the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	Know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, of which the first is that it be dislocated at the joint of the shoulder to the lower part.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is that it be dislocated above the muscle, and this is done tightly; and it is not dislocated at the back parts by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the front parts by the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And most often it is dislocated and out from the lower parts behind the shoulder, and most often in those of whom the flesh is thin, it is dislocated easily; but in those in whom there is much flesh, it is forced out with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And very often it happens to some men by impact or blow, and the muscle of him is swollen with a hard swelling, and it is bitten by that which has already been dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Therefore let you do this so that you may be experienced in it, and then proceed with its treatment.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And the dislocation of it is known when it is at the lower parts behind the shoulder; so that you distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the intact muscle, for you see a clear difference in them; and you see in the head of the muscle concavity and above the shoulder behind the touch of the head of the muscle as though by an egg, and the patient cannot reduce his hand to his ear on that side, nor move it at all.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is dislocated behind or above the shoulder, and you see a clear touch, and it is not hidden.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And this dislocation is reduced easily when it is fresh and the patient is young.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And its reduction is that the minister lifts the hand of him to the upper parts; and let the assistant place his fingers below the shoulder of him, and lift the joint with strength to its place, and let the minister lift the hand of him, and extend it above; and let a bandage be placed over it so that it returns easily.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	But if by what we have said it does not return, and the dislocation occurred long ago, let the patient be bathed in hot water and be administered embrocation that softens and lines it as though its joints were cut with a sharp razor, and let fenugreek, and melilot be administered in water.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	And let the patient be laid on his back and let his arm be placed below the shoulder of him, and let the bandage be tightened around it between elevation and compression, and let the doctor hold the top of the muscle with strength, and lift the hand of the patient so that it is not clenched to the lower parts, and let the assistant hold the head of the patient so that he does not clench his jaws to the lower parts, for then it returns to its place.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you want, reduce him according to this manner: and let there be present a man who is longer than the patient, and stand on that side of him, and insert his arm below the shoulder of the patient and lift the shoulder of him above while the patient is suspended in air, and let the assistant pull the hand of the patient from the lower parts of his belly.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	But if the patient is young, then let him be suspended for some other cause, so that he is heavy, for then the dislocation returns at once.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And it is reduced in the same way: a long pole is placed on the ground with a round head, as if it were a mortar, which is neither thick nor thin, and then the patient is laid down; since being placed on the head of the post are lion's cloth, and the patient stands according to the length of the post, and then his hand is extended from the parts below to the other side; and the rest of his body is stretched with strength, because the joint returns to its place with speed.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if it is difficult to reduce the patient for all of these reasons that we have mentioned, then use this treatment. Take a pole whose length is two cubits and width four digits; let its thickness be removed in the shape of a hammer according to this form:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And then on the round head, lions' cloth is tied so that the pole does not hurt the patient.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And then the hammer is placed below the patient's buttock; his hand or arm is extended over the pole towards the parts below; and the pole is tied around the helper's hip, arm, and hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	Then the arm is placed on a step of the ladder according to its width; and the hand is extended to the parts below; and the rest of the body is suspended from the other side, because the joint enters immediately.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the instrument is completed according to any method that is possible for you; then wait until you place a pad made of wool equal in quantity below his buttock; and then spread ointment prepared from flour with rosewater on all the muscle, as if it were turned over above, and then tightly press down on the buttock with a decent pressure; let the bandage be turned around the ointment, and his hand be attached to his neck, and left, and may not be harmed for six days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And wait that the food of the patient be little, until his member is comforted, because it is easier for him to heal.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And then the food be given more, seven or eight times, and an exercise be performed; and if it is堅固 and not softened, then he is healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	But if the joint is dislocated many times due to humidity that happens to him or due to another cause, then in that one must be administered cautery with three punctures, according as it was said before in the chapter on cautery.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if all this is done and after seven days the bandage is removed and the joint is not closed, and the ointment and pressure are applied to him several times, and it is not closed and he cannot raise that arm to the parts above, then know that his nerves, which are at the head of the muscle, are already cut or extended or softened, and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	From the dislocation of that which is done from the feet and breast or the parts behind, the reduction is done with pushing and extending with hands, while it returns in.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And the other pressure must be administered to that one as it is healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if it happens that healing weighs on the member and delays its movement, then the patient should take baths many times so that that weight is removed and he returns to his first nature.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter .XXVII.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	Of healing of dislocation of the jaw.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	Know that the jaw joint is dislocated with difficulty and returns with difficulty; and it is dislocated to all sides, especially to the front from the back, and its dislocation is not hidden from you because when you press down on it or touch it according to any figure it is dislocated, it is manifested to you clearly that the joint is hollowed out and cannot bend the arm or touch with that his own muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And wait that your hands reduce the dislocation immediately before it comes to him pustules cauterized, because if it comes to him pustules cauterized, it is difficult for him to be reduced, and strongly he will not heal at all; especially when it is on the back, for it is worse than all other kinds of dislocations, and causes greater pain, and many times ends in death.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And the restoration of it, when that which is possible to reduce, is that his hand be extended with two hands; and let his arm be expanded, and the doctor's hands be on the jaw and under him, pushing the joint with the tips of his fingers, or with the edge of his palm so that it returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	But if the dislocation is to the front parties, then it returns as he bends his hand with his own hand, while he pushes down on the jaw with the edge of his palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not obey reduction, then administer a vehement extension and a very strong motion.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And it is that two ministers extend the arm, and they hold that joint two ministers so that it is not harmed by the extension.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	And then let the arm be turned over all parts, because it is wrapped around the hand with folded cloth or bandage.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, he should apply some oil to it so that it helps by facilitating lubrication of the joint; and then push down on the joint with violent impulse so that it returns.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	And then the reduction of it must be that ointment is applied on which is stiffened and dried with rosewater; let it be tightened with a decent pressure, and his arm be suspended from the neck, and left for several days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And then let it be removed; and if the joint is formed in its place, then you remove the bandage from him.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see that the joint is not tighter, then iterate the ointment and bandage, and leave that for several days until it is tightened; and then remove that.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	But if it happens to him that the weight of the reduction of the joint is heavy and its disposition is in movement, then administer wetting in a bath and subtle friction, while it is cooled down; or apply on the joint aloe, so that there is fat of motion; and then let it be bandaged and left for the day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And then remove that and put him in a bath; and when he is sweat, then you rub the joint with mild friction, and then iterate on it aloe, so that it is ointment of motion, one day, and the second, and the third,
corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denolam intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	The corruption has already arrived at the brain' lining of the bath, so that it is limited.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you wish, apply on that the udder of a cow wet and heated with a bandage, and tightly press on that; and do that several times, because it is moist and reduces to its disposition.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter .XXVIII.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	Of healing of dislocation of malacet, so is the joint that is between the arm and the hand.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	Malacet of the hand some times is displaced, and the reduction of its dislocation is easier, and it is contrary to other joints; but however let there be swiftness in the reduction of it in the hour in which it is displaced, before that place comes to pustules cauterized or that happens to him cautery.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the reduction of its dislocation is that you stop the joint of the hand on a table and let the minister extend his hand, and the doctor put his hand or the palm of his hand on the edge of the joint, pushing it so that it returns to its place.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	However, one must consider whether the palm is already turned towards the belly of the hand; then the patient should place the back of their hand on a table below the extension and reduction. And if the dislocation precedes from the back of the hand, then the position of the hand should be intrinsecally on the table so that the doctor's hand can grasp that imminence of the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And if he returns at once, that is good; but if not, then press on the pustule with your finger until it gives way and let it go, and do not repeat this, or else he will not endure nor be able to bear the reduction after so many days have passed.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	But the bone will return to its position according to its tortuosity; and if you observe no cause in the patient, except that his hand is relaxed and cannot grasp anything, then know that the nerves are torn or cut, and there is nothing inside him except that it should be tightened with a cautery near its dislocation, and strengthen it there firmly.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	Then when the patient is returned to his former state, apply to him the plaster which we have recommended, and let it remain and be tightened for three days; and then let it be loosened and left off, and the hand exercised.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	But if his movement is impeded and some heaviness occurs in him, then loosen that with warm water and with friction several times, while he is being eased.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	Of the cure for dislocation of the teeth.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	The teeth are sometimes completely dislocated.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when any tooth is dislocated to the back of the hand or to its belly, then press on the tooth and drive out the dislocation of it with your fingernails, while it returns to place.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	Then support the head of the tooth and suspend that from the part to which it is dislocated, and leave that for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	And then suspend and extend that until it is straightened out in its place on the following day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when morning comes, loosen that according to the narrative, and do not cease loosening it during the day and exercising with movement, and do so at night as well; and do this for several days until it is tightened.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And feign that it is dislocated to the belly of the hand, and loosen that to that part, and do with it your first operation until it is healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And similarly do with it if it is dislocated to other parts.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter 30.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	Of the cure for dislocation of the vertebrae in the back.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When complete dislocation occurs to any of the vertebrae in the back or neck, and several vertebrae are displaced from their places, then in that there is no cure, for death awaits the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	And a sign of this is that the excretion of the patient is outside his control, and he cannot retain it; and often several members of his body or both legs or both arms, or one of those are relaxed; or one vertebra is displaced from its place, for often it is displaced and often the removal of those to four parts occurs.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Then when that is displaced to the back parts, it is called dislocation of the spine.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	But its cure is that you should consider if the dislocation occurred in childhood, for then there is no cure for that, and there is no healing of it at all.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	But of that which occurs due to impact or concussion or similarly, the Ancients have spoken of methods of cure with prolix speech, of which the best returns with profit; but I have abridged that which the few excuse from its excess due to my proximity to the intention and its exposition, and in which I have expounded and formed it from diverse instruments, by which I will demonstrate and explain.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And I say that in dislocation which occurs to the front part of the feet, there is no healing for it; and similarly in that which is done on both sides.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And of those, only that which occurs in the back properly is healed by me.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And let the patient be extended on his face over a soft bed, and let him be extended below by an instrument moistened in order that his feet not be bound.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And then a straight staff should be placed, fixed in the earth at the end of the bed around his head, and another staff in air holding up his feet at the other end of the bed.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	And one minister should hold the staff and not be fixed in a hole; and another minister should hold the other according to that form.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then wrap around the head of the patient and let them lift up with their hands the end of the staff which is beneath his head, and extend the other end of the staff to the other staff which is beneath his feet; and then tighten all the cords and do this to the other staff which is beneath his feet.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And then the ministers each extend the cords to the end of the staff, and let the staffs not be displaced from their places where they are fixed, but rather let them be tightened as I have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the doctor should place his palms over the vertebra with strength until it returns to its position, or he should place it on a table and then tighten his feet over the table until it returns.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	But if it does not return by this means, then take a table whose breadth or length is in air about three arms, and hollow out in the wall of which we have said that it is near the patient a place into which the end of the table falls.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And then place the middle of the table over the vertebra, and the doctor should place his feet over the other end, and tighten well until the vertebra is tightened and returns to its position.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you wish, open with a pulley which is turned by hand; and fix in the earth behind the head of the patient two staffs, the length of which are an arm each, and fix the head of him in the end of the pulley two staffs, and let the length be between each staff one palm, and each be fixed in the earth so that it is not displaced.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And there should be a round staff in which is the pulley, and it should be turned in the two holes of the two staffs.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at its end is a hole in which the staff is formed, the length of which is one palm by that which is turned; and likewise in the two other staffs is similarly.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then tighten the cords which you have tightened around the feet of the patient in the pulley which is beneath his head, and the cords which you have tightened around his thighs in the turn which is beneath his feet.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And then each pulley should have a minister who turns the pulley with his hand, and the doctor should warm the vertebra as we have said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is the form of the pulley:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And when the vertebra is returned and the place warmed, then consider that you pause on the dislocation a plaster dried with oil of roses, and then pitch; and then pause over the plaster a table whose breadth is three digits or more, and its length should take up the distance of the dislocation, and over the part of the vertebra.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And then let him be tied with a bandage as we have said before, and feed the patient with subtle food until he is healed.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if there is any swelling in the affected area at the end of the healing process, then medicines that soften and loosen should be administered through oral intake over a long period of time, as we have described; and a lead plate has already been applied to that area.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And sometimes swelling occurs at the base of the spine, and it is caused by that displacement; and there is a bone in that area which should not be subjected to this medicine, because if it is, it will likely cause death.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	On the treatment of a dislocated hip.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	Know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle are not designed to be dislocated, but only to move slightly with a small cavity.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the joint of the hip is dislocated in four ways: it is dislocated on the inside or outside, or forward or backward.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	Most often, it is dislocated to the inside, and less often to the front or back.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	And the sign of dislocation to the inside is that when you straighten the leg of the patient, it is longer and more prominent than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend their foot backward, and there is a swelling on top of the hip joint, because the head of the femur has shifted here.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	And the sign of dislocation to the outside is that its features are opposite to the previous description.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	And the sign of dislocation forward is that they can only extend their leg, but not bend it at the knee due to pain; if they try to walk on the ball of their foot, they cannot; and their urine is retained, and there is swelling in the groin area, and they walk on their heels.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	And the sign of dislocation backward is that they cannot extend or bend their leg at the knee; the leg is shorter than the other, and the groin area is softened, and the head of the femur has shifted backward.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	However, the reduction of this dislocation is that you must consider whether the dislocation is old and chronic: if it has been like that for a long time and you administer reduction according to its condition, then it will not be cured completely; and in that case, there should be no prosomecio.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	But with the patient who has a recent dislocation, and it is one of the four types of dislocation, then you must try to return the joint to its proper position and extend it toward the inside and outside, and move it to the right and left, for it will quickly return to its place and will not require any other treatment.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	But if it does not return to its proper position in this way, then you must prepare a strong bandage and extend the leg of the patient from the lowest part, or with their own hands, or with a bandage tied around the leg above the knee; and another person should hold the end of the bandage while someone else pulls it down below the patient's fingers; then tightly bind the lion's tongue around the head of the femur.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And the extension should be from the inside to the groin, or from the back to the shoulder blade.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And they should all be extended at the same time while the patient is raised from the ground and their leg hangs down.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	And this type of extension is common to all four types.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	So if the dislocation returns according to what we have said, it is good; but if not, then it is necessary to use any method that one knows of their own cure.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the proper reduction of it, when it is dislocated to the inside, the patient should lie on their side; then place the bandages over the head of the femur in that area between the head of the femur and the groin; and extend the bandage from above the groin toward the highest part of the collarbone.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And another assistant should hold the patient' leg firmly, press on the large part of the hip joint and extend toward the outside with strong extension, for it will return to its place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this is the quickest cure by which this member is reduced compared to the other methods.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	But if it is resisted and does not obey the treatment with this method of cure for both feet at the same time, then both feet should be bound together tightly, on the soles and over the instep.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And the length of each band should be the amount of four fingers, and the leg of the patient should be extended more than the other by the amount of two fingers.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And the patient should be suspended over the head of the pillar, and it should be in the middle; and its length from the ground should be the amount of two yards.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And order a strong young man to push down on the head of the femur, and another strong young man should suspend the patient, and the other young man should push up on the hip with strength, for the joint will return to its place quickly.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	But in the proper reduction, when it is dislocated to the outside, the patient should lie on their back according to what we have recommended regarding frozen gel; and the bandage should be tightly bound around the leg of the patient and over the foot.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And two pillars should be placed, one under the feet of the patient, and the other under their head; and the pillar placed under the buttocks should be wrapped with wet cloths, so that the patient is not damaged by the pillar being between their thighs, so that the extension toward the lowest part is not hindered.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And each assistant should extend their part, and the doctor with his hand should guide the reduction according to the art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	So, if it obeys extension, it will be very good; but if not, then pause over it diligently and in that way which we have said regarding congelation for that extension.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	But the patient should lie on their side comfortably.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is forward, then the leg should be extended more than usual, and according to this measurement, the palm of the doctor's right hand should be placed over the groin, and another assistant should pull that up with their other hand, and with that pulling, extend it toward the lowest part at the knee.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	And if the dislocation is backward, then the patient' leg should not be extended toward the lowest part, and it should be elevated above the ground; but it should be placed on a hard surface, just as the leg joint is dislocated to the outside, according to what we have said about its placement on two surfaces; and it should lie on its side and the bandages should be extended, according to what we have said, without pain.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And there should be administration of compression with a table over the area where the joint is located.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	So when the reduction is complete according to what we have said — and the sign of the reduction of it is not hidden from you, and it is that you extend two legs, and when you see those angles and the patient stretches their leg and expands it without excuse, then you know that the member according to which it has returned — and then you adjust two thighs and pause with plaster and expand it with a bandage so that the joint is not bent in any of the parts; and bind the leg to rest for three days or four.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	Then, cut the ligament and the plaster, and compare one leg to the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	Now, if you see these wounds in reality, then know that the dislocation is already healed and the patient can walk.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any cause for softening, then return and plaster that one, and stretch the other according to your first stretching, and leave it for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	Then loosen that one, and make that one delay in walking for some days, until he is comfortable.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter 32.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	Of the cure of dislocation of the jaw.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The jaw is dislocated in three ways: it is dislocated at the outward parts, and at the inward parts, and at the lower parts more than at the upper parts; and it is not dislocated at the frontward parts.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of dislocation is that you command the patient to apply his jaw to his thigh; then know that the jaw is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of all these ways is that you make the patient lie down straight, so that he extend his leg, if he can, on that; adhere your two hands to his face, and place his foot between your feet; and then make adhere your jaw to his palm, and retain those between your teeth over his jaw with strength, and another extends his leg while the jaw returns to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And the sign of reduction is that his thigh adheres to the cushion with light non-labouring.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Then plaster that one and make adhere the leg to the cushion, and then bind those together with a bandage for three or four days, and then loosen those.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not use the patient of walking for some days until he is healed and comfortable.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	But if the reduction to you is excused, then administer strong extension with ligaments of which in the cure of the hip preceding narrative.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter 33.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	Of the cure of the dislocation of the ankle.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The ankle some times is sprained by small removal, and some times it is dislocated according to complement, and the dislocation of it is made either at the inward parts or at the outward parts.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the sign of the dislocation of it is that you see the ankle swollen proceeding to the part to which it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	But the cure of the sprain of it is by slight reduction, and it is that he be extended with facility with hands and be bound while he returns.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	But in the cure of it when it is dislocated according to complement, you should make the patient lie down straight, and have one strong and valiant minister of the part behind the jaw of that in the middle place of it.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	And then you with your right hand draw the foot of the highest part, and with your left hand of the lowest part of the foot in the place of the ankle.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	And then pull the foot to you with your right hand, and then with the left twice, and then extend with the left; and press the foot of the leg with the right beneath the thigh.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And do that two times according as we have counted.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And then press the foot of the leg to the thigh the third time, and you are at the ankle.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	Therefore if it returns in one time or two according to this manner, and if you see the foot swollen, it is good; and if not, then repeat the operation on it, for it will return.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	But if to you is prohibited the reduction of it by that which we have recommended, then make the patient lie down on his back on earth, and stretch a stake in firm earth, and that box between his thighs, and you already have wrapped a cloth around him so that he does not slide.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	And then the minister of it have his thighs, and then another minister extend the leg with their hands or with ligament that lies over the neck of the leg; and then each minister extend against extension of his fellow, and the stake be extended between the thighs of the patient retaining that, so that the body of him is not pulled to the lowest parts beyond his extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And then the doctor softens the dislocation with their hands, and another minister have the healthy thigh to the lowest parts, for the dislocation returns with facility.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And therefore when the dislocation returns and is declared to you the health of the reduction of it, then pause plaster and stretch that with ligaments firmly, and bind the leg to the ankle.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And you should fear or keep from the nerves which are behind on the ankle, lest the ligament over that be violent and lead it strongly.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	And then leave that for two days or three; and if the ligament is softened, stretch that.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	And then loosen that on the third day or the fourth, and forbid the patient to walk for 40 days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	But if he is forced to walk before that space, it is not done with security that the dislocation is not dissolved and corrupted, and then that which does not receive cure.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if there happens to him an abscess with pus, then you minister in the ceding of it that in which our narrative preceded, in another place of cure and of fomentation, while it is suppurative.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter 34.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	Of the cure of dislocation of the toes of the feet.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	That which is dislocated be swollen with little extension without difficulty; and that which is difficult, beforehand is lighter.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	But if the dislocation is in some part of the jaw of the leg, then you make the patient lie down his leg on even ground or on a table, and be standing thus as if he were walking.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	And then you stand on your feet, and place your leg over that which protrudes from the joints, and then press that with your leg with strength while it returns, and see that which is swollen and does not appear in the place prominent.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	And then pause under the belly of the leg of him a table that takes all the leg, to which are two ends, and then stretch that with decent and firm extension for three days; and then loosen that and make that rest from walking for some days, while it is stretched out and of reduction is assured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	Of the species of dislocation that are made by plague or by fracture, or by any other impingement.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When there happens any cause of those, and you are expert in the cure of that and in the restoration of it, many times you succeed after death.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And therefore do not presume upon the cure of it, but that which is expert in the art, long-suffering, compassionate and pitiful, tardy, not hasty nor presumptuous; and use in the beginning of medicines that produce suppurative abscesses justly, and let the patient be subject to divine judgement, unless you hope for salvation from perdition, from the wickedness alleviation, and in which appears some hope.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And then try as much as you can of it the reduction in the beginning of the cause, before that he receives suppurative abscess.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And then if the member returns according as you wish, then minister regimen which yields suppurative abscess and cures the plague with that which suits him of the gummed parts dried.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if dislocation is by fracture and impingement happens in the separated bones, then you be expert of that, and do in that what we have said in the simple wickedness of those.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And observe and avoid according to your ability the instrument of fear as I have described it in my sermon; for by doing so you will better serve your Creator, more firmly uphold your glory, and bring greater health to your true body in this life.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Thus ends the text of Albucasis, may God bless it.
Amen.	Amen.
