Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Thus begins Al-Buqashani's words.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	O son, I give you this book, which is the last of medical science, for its completion leads to it; and for its explanations, and its declarations, I see that I fulfill it for you as a treatise, which is part of surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	For surgery is prostrated in our region and in our time completely deprived, so much so that it is dangerous science; and its evidence remains; and it was not except for a few small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which change them into error and confusion within that they are closed the interpretations of them and is elongated the force of them and art.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And I see that I have animated it with an order of this treatise in that second way of explanation and declaration and abbreviation; and because it comes to the forms of tools cauterizing and other instruments of the work by addition of the declaration, and preparation of it, which is necessary cause.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	The reason why a good craftsman does not excel in our time is that the art of medicine is long, and that his actor before being practiced in the science of anatomy which covers Gualia within that he knows the growth of limbs and forms of them, and the connection and separation of their; and has the understanding of bones, nerves, and ligaments, and the number of those, and the structure of them. And the pulsing veins and quiet ones, and places of impression of them.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And therefore I say that by a name is it known, more in the small work, and most in the art of surgery.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	More, we have said of this in the introduction of this book; for who does not know that I have told you of anatomy, it is not necessary that he falls into an error by which men die; for thus are found many of them, for they are formed in this science and get away from that one of that science and its experiments.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	For I saw a doctor come out and experiment to have hit an escrophyl apoplema in the neck of a woman, and hit some arteries of the neck so that blood flowed heavily from it; that the woman fell dead among her people.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And I saw another doctor who said that he would drink a stone from a man which had passed in his state; and the stone was large, and it came to him and dried up that stone with a piece of the bladder, so that that man died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And I called to him to draw out that, and I saw that because of the size of the stone and the patient's disposition, I knew for sure that he would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And I saw another doctor who took a stipendium from a duke of our land for surgery; and he put the patient on a black cauldron that was broken in his crotch; and prepared the doctor because of his ignorance, drawing out the fracture, on the plane, with powder and needles to strengthen it, and did not leave the plane to breathe.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	Then he returned the second time according to his desires, and he returned the prayer, and he returned the release by some days and commanded that we release the bond; and so it was, then the crotch and the foot are opened, and come to ruin.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And I was called to him, and I prepared to release the bond, and achieved peace and ease of their pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	But however, corruption was confirmed in the member, so that I could not restrain it, and I did not stop the movement of corruption in the member until the patient was in peril.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And I saw another doctor who pierced a cancerous apoplema; and it became ulcerated by a few days, so that the malice of it was increased by the Lord of it.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	For that reason is that the cold cauterization is pure of melancholic humor; therefore it does not cover that it comes to him by all means, but that it is in a member which you suffer that of all things is host.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And therefore, son, it is necessary for you that the operation at hand be divided into two parts: one in the operation to which health is associated, and work in the performance of which danger is present.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And I have already done here in all places of this book in which it is wrong and fear; so that it is necessary for you to guard here and let those go, so that the pages do not rob your way to speak and distract you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And therefore take your weapons with diligence and protection of God, and your misfortunes with kindness and constancy.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best way by the grace of God to attain to salvation and the laudable succession, and leave the terrible difficulties of difficult recovery; and retain your weapons from here that you may be afraid, so that it is left in your faith and your name does not escape: for it remains to your glory, and later, at the end, to your sanctifications.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Gualia has already been said in some of its warnings:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	"Do not prescribe evil medicine, so that you do not give bad doctors."
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And I have divided this book into three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Begin the division of the book, and first of the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter is ordered from the head to the feet, in the shapes of tools and instruments of cauterizing, and that is necessary in the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	Begin the division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter is divided into two parts: the one which is for the operation of the sides and the other for the operation of the heart; all well ordered and arranged according to the shapes of tools.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	Begin the division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter is divided into three parts: the one which is of the restoration and displacement, and the cure of twisted things and similar to them; a chapter well ordered from head to foot, and of the shapes of tools.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	Of fire cauterizing and acute medicine and recall of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	With that begins the treatise of the whole book.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	I will tell you the quality of the growths of that cauterizing and the danger of it; and in what combination it is forbidden to cauterize.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Then I say that the speech of the quality of cauterizing and the danger of it is long and wordy, and subtle by science, and hidden; and of it has spoken much wisdom, and I am satisfied with a little of their speeches, for they are long.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And therefore I say that cauterizing confers on all combinations universally; which are two combinations, which are combination of tail and head, and the head of the tail.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the combination of tail and dry matter is disagree; for some say that cauterizing is beneficial to that, and others say the opposite, that cauterizing is not suitable in a dry disease which has quality and dryness, since the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is not suitable that such a dry disease be healed.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And he who says the opposite of that, that by cauterizing is made beneficial in all dry disease which has quality and dryness, because when you compare the bodies of men with the moisture of them to the combination of fire, you find the bodies of men burning.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I say by the word of that, which I have already experienced here sometimes to discover.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	But however I do not cover that come on this it which he is already exproat and excersitat in the chapter of cautery per latter exercise, and knows the difference of the complexity of men and the disposition of the maladys in their meteyssas, and causes of those, and the accidents of their, and the space of time of those.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	Mays in the other complexities, it is not upon you fear, and most importantly in the maladys that are moist and cold, because all doctors have agreed on those, and do not differ in the exercise to make cauterization in them.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And you know, children, that of the secret of cure by cautery with fire and of the goodness of it, is because the fire is simple, the action of which does not reach but to the member that is cauterized and not to the other member by the application thereof but to a slight injury.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	The action of the burning medicine reaches to that in the members which makes it very hot, and does not cool but brings fever; it very much hurts the member that is being cauterized, but does not hurt that which is opposite.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	Mays the fire, for its smallness and its substance goodness does not cause it but that which is superfluous; And I have already known by experience and by length of service in the study about the truth of causes; and because of this I am excused from the length of the speech And if it were not that it is not read at my hand in a moment to you hidden with the fire, and the quality of the operation of it in the bodies and of its expulsion by which it expels the maladies, by philosophical speech, which would serve to acute your ears.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And you know, children, that the seasons do not agree as to the time when it is convenient to make cauterization and pause the best time of spring.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And I say that cauterization is convenient at all times, so that the injury by the time is immersed in the movement of it which is drawn out by cauterization, and more if cauterization is for pains or necessary pains, which do not suffer delay because of which they are feared from those that come evil, which is greater than a small injury entering through time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And thus do not make it in your ears, or children, this I say to you, but that the popular and foolish people consider; so that to those diseases which are cured by cauterization is not convenient always, and pause that consequence.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the cause is not good then that you do as they do for it, because cauterization is only in place of medicine which alters the complexity and dries up the moisture which is the cause why pains come.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	But however cauterization superfluous over medicine because of its value and the goodness of its operation and the greatness of its Lord's power.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	And it is possible that the malady return at any hour of time, according to the complexity of the malady and the location of the malady and the goodness of it, and because of this, it is prepared in its body by the addition of superfluous things in it, and because of which it is obtained from it in its acquisition in food and semblantz of those causes; but that the malady for which cauterization is administered is a subtle malady in a member of few superfluous things and moisture, then cauterization of tooth for pain and resembling that one, it is possible that in him does not return that pain, but comes in small.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	And however the popular speech is that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine, and it is a foolish speech, not to those who understand it, because they believe that it is a cure which profits by medicine or by another cause; but that the speech is right to you, children, because I will explain why.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the cause is opposite to that; and my intention that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine is only when we administer the methods of cure in some diseases, and those medicines do not profit, and at the end of the cause we administer cauterization, and it profits to him.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And therefore I say that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine, not according to the speech which the popular and foolish people understand.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And they say that cauterization with gold is better than cauterization with iron, and do not say this only because of the equality of gold and its smallness; and from this it is known to you that it is a popular saying.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they say that the place of cauterization does not cause pain, if it is not completely good, because I have seen and attracted that this does not cause pain to that one but to another; and cauterization with gold is good and better than cauterization with iron, which they say; but when you make cauterization with fire of gold, it is not known to you, because it is made by the quantity that you want for the roughness of the gold, and because it prepares to receive a cut; and if you place over it an ignition it creates the gold to the fire, and possibly in the fire some scales from which the artifice cuts himself because of the occupation of this one.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And by the way, it is necessary to make cauterization with iron very lightly and then carefully in the order of operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have ordered this chapter in cauterization according to the other chapters, and I have ordered those within the chapters that suit you best for so that you ask what you want of them.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	Of cauterization with pains of the head because of coldness and moisture.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cauterization confers on moisture and coldness on the servel accident of which two causes; so is a cause of soda and many fluxes of rheumatic, called corss, from the head to the branches of the neck flowing, and many sleeping, and pain of teeth and the golaeryo, and generally of all diseases that are caused by coldness; then, in a way similar to those diseases.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cauterization is that first you command the malady that it be evacuated by medicine lacative, exposing the head, for three or four nights, according to what you require from the goodness of the malady and the age of it and its costume.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then order him to shave his head with a razor, and then let that person sit between your legs on a bench and place his hands over the feet of his Lord.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then pause the cut from your palm near the hand on the cut of the nose between the branches of his lord.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	But however, when the young man says of his place it has come, then mark that place by trying, and order to make cauterization with olive oil of which this is the form:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And then let that sit on the place carefully as it descends, by which the hand of the young man is tightly pressed little by little, and you turn that person.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And then lift your hand lightly and look at the place, and if you see any quantity of hair already falling, as well as the quantity of gravel that falls from it, then raise your hand again; and if not return your hand to him with iron, with another from it, if it is cold, within which I have said to you.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then take a little salt and dissolve that person on the place and leave that for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then let that sit in the fire's bed covered with a cloth and leave that within which is destroyed the scale of the fire.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the place with a four-fold bitter medicine within which be cured.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And it was said that when the Roman plague broke out, so much better was the harvest, because it is better and more fruitful.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And some of them said that the cord within the bone should be cauterized, and cautery should be placed within so that a small part of the bone's tissue is burned.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	Then let water be poured that is close to the bone, and then let it be cured.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And others said that the cautery should reach the back, inside the bone so that it doesn't break through, and this is the form of small surgery.
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	They recommend exhaling the vapors from above that spot.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And let the wound be kept open for a long time, and then let it be cured within so that it hardens.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	I do not see these two types of cauterization in all places, but in some cases out of fear; and this one, in my opinion, is better to save when it is necessary because the head is a central part for the continuity of life in the whole body, and more so when the patient' head is of frail nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the first type of cauterization is better saved and more useful to me; and from that, I choose this work to save life.
Capitol segon.	Second.
Del cauteri del cap.	Of the head cauterization.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When in the whole head chronic and prolonged pain occurs due to water in the skull, and it is used with scalpel and scythes and poultices and plasters and compresses and balms, and more so if the head has already been cauterized with a cauterizer that was not effective for some reason, then consider that since the patient' head is of strong creation in its nature; and it is not pleasant and causes a great pain, then let another cauterization be performed after a short time.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	Then let that one be cauterized on the edge of his hairline with cautery within so that the cord is broken.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Then cut the cord and expose a small amount of bone where we have counted and cauterize that one with a cauterizer in the back of the head at the location called "vas," — and this is the spot where wind is felt.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And rejoice in your healing, and do not expose the bone because the water causes great pain that is different from the pain of all other head cauterizations.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And let this cauterization be performed in its location, because, as we have said, the cauterization with which the hairline of the head and the occiput are treated is subtler cauterization than that with which the back of the head is treated; and this is the form.
Capitol ters.	Third.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	Of cauterization for emigre.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When pain in the edge of the head is hard, or there is pain inside the ear, then wash the head with medicine, and administer another treatment, which I have described in the causes of headaches; and if it does not benefit, then cauterize it in two ways: either with burning medicine, or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	Perhaps cauterizing with burning medicine is better than taking a dolent of ale, and scraping that one and cleaning the ends from both sides.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	Then cut the area of pain in the temple with a sharp scalpel within so that the cord is hidden.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	Then tighten it on the affected area with a strong constriction, and leave it for three hours; then dip the area in oil, and leave the plague for two or three days, and then place it under water within the location where the pain is felt.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then let that one be cured with ointment so that it heals.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you want, there are some medicines described in the second book of burning medicines.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	Perhaps cauterizing with iron according to this method:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	And it is called a small peg, because the head is thus shaped like a peg and there is a small curve in its middle; and in the middle of it is a slight prominence.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	Then place it on the painful spot, and hold your hand away from it — so that the iron does not burn your hand — and move the small piece of iron slowly over the area.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the amount of the liquid that is absorbed by the tissue of the cord is thus much, and then raise your hand away from it so that the artery does not burn, which is left, so that there is no flow of blood.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then dip the cord in salt water and place it on the spot, and leave it for three days; then dip the area at the edge slightly with oil, and let that one be cured with ointment so that it heals.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you see this, cauterize the end of the knife according to cauterization and be careful not to cut the artery in this non-traditional emigre.
Capitol quart.	Fourth.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	Of cauterization for an ancient emigre.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you treat an emigre with water described in the previous treatment and in the division of headaches, and if that treatment does not benefit, and sometimes because of the headache caused by water, which we have said to be treated with a scalpel cauterization so that it whitens, because it indicates on the area of pain according to its length from which the majority of it comes, or where it is; then pause your hand for a moment and tighten it within a strong constriction, and place the tip of a sharp knife on fire until it becomes white-hot, and then apply it to the affected area so that it burns.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, it is necessary for you to guard against the continuation of the jaw, which is moved during mastication, and that the tongue is not burned and the nerves are not damaged, and that it does not become spasm.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it is about the care and safety of the flow of blood from the artery that is being cut off, for in the cutting of it is fear, and more so when you do not know what water is used and you are not careful and attentive; then let the operation begin on the patient at the beginning.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And I come to the memory of the accident of blood flow from the artery according to his way, in his location of this freedom.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	If this headache does not benefit from that cauterization and the cord of the emigre is tolerable, then let that one be cauterized in the middle of the head according to what we have described, and cure the plague so that it heals.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you see this, administer the cauterization which we have described in the head of stretching the artery with two knives, and this is the best cauterization and more so.
Capitol .v.	Fifth.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	Of cauterization for ear pains.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When there is pain in the ear due to scratching and it does not benefit from the other treatment that we have described in the division of causes, then burn the cauterization, and this is the one which has no name, and this is its form:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	Then place the tip of the knife or iron on the edge of the ear, and move it in a circular motion, or around the whole ear if the pain is there; or place it on one side of the ear and then move it to the other side if the pain is on that side.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Alonge them, little by little, the cauterization of the ear lobe, so as not to make him lose his balance by trying the place with a touch.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the cauterization of the points is done on the entire ear lobe, and those are already healed, and the places are then cleaned so that they are healthy.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	Of cauterization of torture.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	Torture which is cured and has not to do with the spices that come through the blood, according to what we have said in the division of the maltitudes.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cauterization of the spice which comes forth from drought or from a nerve spasm.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you cure that kind of torture with jerrings and capipurgies and gargles, and do not confirm your cure, then three cauterizations are to be done: the first on the lobe of the ear, the second on a small piece of skin from the temple, and the third on the junction of two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And pause the small cauterization on the opposite side of the male malady, for softening does not happen except in that part which is healthy.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	And the shape of the cauterization is that you cauterize it on the right side of the lobe of the ear, placing a small piece over the top of the head, and in the temple, which is according to the length of the said piece, and pause your hand so that the quantity of the spice of the blood comes out.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	This is the shape of the cauterization, and it is special with the knife, the shape of which is placed in front of the table.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	But even more careful is it that he put a little of the spice on the feet, and that he does not use too much useless grace.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	Then return the place to where it was before being cut, so that it is healthy.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	Of cauterization of ancient apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is old and you have said that you do not confirm your cure on the patient who has no fever, then four cauterizations are to be done: on all the hair of his head; and on the place where the pulse was before, as we have said; and in the neck.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the way of doing the cauterization is done according to what has been said.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And it is cauterized over the mouth of the stomach; and then follow; and be cleaned with water that you have cut.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	Of cauterization of oblivion caused by flame.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	Then give the patient in the beginning jerrings big and pills with a strong voice.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	Then return the head of the patient completely, and place it on the neck of him with the paste described in the treatise of pastes.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	Then pause some of them, for that is a way of cauterization.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And put it according to that measure which I have already said.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And so if by those it is healthy; and otherwise, then do three cauterizations on the last part of his head, which are separated from the last part of the top within the last part of the head.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And between each cauterization the thickness of the spice, and return the cauterization with water that has been done.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	And if the patient is not thirsty and accepts water, then do the cauterization in the middle; and if you find that there is more addition, then cauterize it on both sides of the head.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Then return the place to where it is healthy; and if the cauterization is olive according to what has been said before.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	Of cauterization of paralysis and softening of the whole body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	Then you process in the softening of the head with jerrings and water that we have said; and return the head to the patient, and do the cauterization in the middle of the head, and on all sides of it, and on the last part of it, and on the two joints.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the softening of the body of three people and the patients are tolerant and the malady is strong, then cauterize it with four cauterizations on the joints of the legs, and afterwards return your hand so that the spice comes out by the blood.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	Then return the place to where it is healthy, and this be cauterization olive.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	Of cauterization of epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	It is not cauterized to the epileptic one, but that epilepsy is caused by blood.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And then return the brain of him completely at the beginning, and with another cure that we have said in the division when the malady is great and the patient is tolerant of the experience of medicines.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it is a child who does not suffer the medicines, then administer gargles and mastication to him in front of water for three days, with a good flavor of food.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	Then return the head of the child completely, and do the cauterization in the middle of the head according to the way that we have said before, and another on the top of him, and on each side of his head, and cauterize it on all sides.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the malady is strong and the patient is tolerant, then cauterize it with the ways that I have said, in having paralysis and softening of the body on the joints of the neck and the joints of the legs.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And do cauterization olive according to what has been said before.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	But if the patient is a child, then pause the small cauterization according to this way.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	Of cauterization of melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humors and gross flame, then cauterize it with the ways that I have said in having paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is excess of declining to melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give him water that softens the brain according to the water that has preceded in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	Then return the head of the patient completely, and place it with a good way on the circle, and return that place to where it was before in the middle of the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And the patient be sixty years old, and is held completely.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	Then pause the linen; and it is more dignifying of a lamb's skin.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And bake it by fire with moderate heat, according to what it suffers when it is hot in the middle.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	Then return that place to where it was before on the circle of him, and leave it so that it is cooled down.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And give the patient in a week once, by water that he has said to him; or if you wish, cauterize it with small points according to what we have said before, and this is the way of doing the cauterization which softens the brain with equality: this is the special cauterization that moistens the brain.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	Then return that place to where it was before in the color of a border or in the shades of yellow and green.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	Of cauterization of descending water in the vein.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When you have said that the beginning of water in the vein is declared by the senses that I have said in the division, then start and give to the patient water that softens his head, and preserve that from all humors.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And put this sweetener in a bath of milk for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	Then command him to shave his head, and cauterize the spot where he will cut his hair; and cauterize twice on both temples if it is the beginning of a fever in two holes, or once on one temple if it is the beginning of water in a hole.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Cut all the veins and arterioles that remain with the blade, and let the cauterization be in the length in the latitude of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And beware of flow of blood when he is cauterized; and if you see any flow of blood from him, stop it with some medicine, which is at your possible.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	Then come with wisdom that is in the extraction of arterioles and in the disappearance of those and the caution against flow of blood.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And some times he is cauterized in the neck with two bones pointed out by two cauterizations.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	Of the Cauterization of Ancient Tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When the tears of the eyes are old, flowing through the veins and arteries that go out to the manifest part of the head, and it is seen that they are superfluitatz, then cauterize with a knife what we have told in the chapter on the beginning of water, touching on the middle spot of the head, and on both temples, and on the neck between two bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if you feel a lack of addition, then cauterize on the whole length of the cheekbone on the edge of the brow with a small cauterization.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	Of the Cauterization of the Odor of the Nose.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you treat the patient with water, which we have said in the division, and do not profit from your treatment, then prepare and give to him three cups of drink; and then shave his head, and cauterize with a half-moon shape.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	Then cauterize on the edge of the brow with a small clavus, with two cauterizations on both eyebrows, next to the hair.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And beware of the arceria that you do not set it on fire.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And of the cauterization with a small clavus, this is the form:
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	Of Cauterization to Soften the Eyelids of the Eyes.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the eye is softened by disease or moisture, then cauterize it with a small cauterization in the shape of a moon; and this is the form of it:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you want to, cauterize on both eyebrows a small amount with two cauterizations from end to end, and let them be extended from the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	Let the length of each cauterization be according to the quantity of the brow.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press too hard on your hand with the cauterization, more according to the quantity that the third part of the eyelid is dried up.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	Of Cauterization to the Eyelid of the Eye When the Hair Turns White and the Hand Holds the Eye.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the hair of the eye turns white in its inner part, so that it pokes the eye, then cauterize it according to two ways: either with fire or with burning medicine.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If it is a cauterization of fire, command the patient to look forward, so that his hair does not burn, until it grows out and falls off; and if he holds his head with a cloth, then your hand should be above, so that the hair does not come into contact with the cloth.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Then let the hair grow out and fall off, so that they are not caught; then place the patient's head in the third position, and put your hand on his brow with a signet, which is according to the shape of a fowl of death, and this is the beginning of the signet.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	Then put it in a bag of wool or in a paste of pigeons on the head.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	Then light the cauterization, and this is the form of it:
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	Then cauterize according to the figure that you have drawn, little by little, until the surface of the hair is burned, so that it looks like a sheet of moss, completely burned.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	The signet of health of the work is that you see the eyelid of the eye already contracted, and the hair of the patient already lifted by the puncture of the head.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	Then lift up your hand and place it on the bag for three days, and then open it and look at the content, that it may be well-made.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then treat that with ointment, so that it is healed.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	But if it returns because of the hair, then treat it again with fire first; and if it is returned because of the eyelid being softened, then treat it again with a cauterization, which we have said above.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	But if the hair is under the eyelid, then cauterize it until it rises to its natural place and is covered, so that the hair does not poke the eye.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	But the cauterization with burning medicine is this: command the patient to look forward, so that his hair does not burn, until it grows out and falls off; then let him hold a cloth over his head, and make a signet of a sheet of moss, which we have said above.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. .i., o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	Then take a sharp knife, and remove the cause with a quick stroke. I. Mix those causes together, and make a paste of them, so that it is not dried up; then spread the paste on the cloth, which we have said above, with the shape of a sheet of moss, and place it on the patient' side; and put the patient' head in the third position, and open the hair.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	Then place the medicine on it, and press it a little, so that the patient does not feel the taste of the medicine, because its taste is in fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	Then when the patient perceives that the medicine has a bitter taste, then let him leave the medicine and take it again by the third side; then when the taste of fire or cutting stops, then wash the head with water; and then consider if the eyelid has been raised already, which is good, or if it has fallen back, which is bad; and if it has fallen back because the medicine has dried up, then your operation is ruined and the hair is damaged.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	Then put it on the bag for safety, so that the hair is not caught; then treat it with ointment of oil or water, so that it is healed.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And you must guard your operation with careful watchfulness, so that the medicine does not fall on the head; and if the eyelid is softened by any cause because of the hair, then treat it again with the medicine on the spot where the eyelid is softened, and as soon as it begins to work, then completely, until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is the form of a sheet of moss.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	The eyes of men are different in size and shape; and therefore your compression should be according to each eye.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	Do not hide the path of the cure for him who studies this craft.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII. De la contraccio de les palpebres.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	On cauterization of the fistula that is in the lacrimal canal of the eye.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you treat the fistula that is in the lacrimal canal of the eye, and do not refer to your own technique, then command the patient to hold his head still on top, and have a minister hold it from behind in such a way that he does not move or shake his head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	Then apply some hot wax or a poultice made of wool on top of the eye.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	Then light the cauterization, this is the form:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	The one that is curved, thus made of a cane or a stick of wood, from one end of which the cauterization is applied.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you see, then let it penetrate to the other end.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you wish, then do so with difficulty.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	However, the curved one is better for the work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	Then press on the fistula if it is open, and draw out its liquid and dry it up.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not open, then open it and extract the pus from it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	Then apply the cauterization that is well lit on top of the eye, and at the same time make a small cut in the corner of the eye, so that the hand or the patient does not move, and the cauterization is applied to the gray part of the eye and let it corrode.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And thus, if at the beginning of the eye cauterization it penetrates into the bone, it is good; and if not, then repeat the cauterization once or twice, as needed, and leave it alone for three days, and then apply the ointment that is dried up around it so that it heals.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	However, if after eleven days it is not healed, then apply the acute corrosive medicine inside so that the bone is uncovered and scrape it according to what your manual says in the patient's chapter.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And another way of treating a fistula, which some earlier writers said: Enter into the place of the fistula and cut it open, and then apply to that crack that is very small in shape: And pour in that quantity of molten lead; and let your hand be well held back, so that the lead does not reach the eye of the patient; and then apply hot wax on top of the patient' s eye where the fistula is, as the lead adheres to the place of the fistula and heals it by a wonderful cure.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed with water that we have mentioned in the cauterization and cure, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to administer trauma through the nose and reduce the fistula to its base according to what comes out in its place.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	On the cauterization of a wound with fire.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Moles that appear as cracks on the lips, and mostly on children' s lips.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	So, when you treat those cracks with water that we have mentioned in the divisions and do not apply your cure, then light the small knife according to this form that it burns:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	The cavity of the nose according to the subtility of a blade.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Then return that knife with precision into those cracks so that the cauterization reaches the base of the cracks.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	Then treat it with cerotine so that it heals.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	On the cauterization of a fistula in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When in the root of the uvula or on the palate or in the roots of the teeth there is an abscess that bursts, and then it is broken, and then it is pushed back, and then it is burned with fire, and your hand is applied to it, so that the burning fire reaches the base of the abscess, and then you treat it with water that we have mentioned in the cure, then apply hot wax on top of the abscess, and let it burn; and then, if there is any pus left, then light the fire a little more; and then treat it as mentioned above for healing.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And if the healing has taken place and it is healed, it is good; and if not, then uncover the place and burn the bone corrupted according to what your manual says in the patient' s chapter.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	On the cauterization of teeth and softening of the gums.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth are loose, then treat those with medicines and do not apply your own technique, then return the patient' s head to the top, and light the cauterization in the form that is mentioned above, and quickly insert it into the tooth; and let the heat of the fire reach the root of the tooth from below.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	Then remove your hand, and repeat the cauterization a few times according to what you wish.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	Then make the patient' s mouth drink saltwater and keep it for an hour, then rinse that out, as the loose tooth is stabilized and the softened gum is tightened and the corrupting moisture is dried up.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	On the cauterization of toothache.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When toothache is caused by cold or heat, or it does not respond to your medicine, then apply any of the following two ways: cauterize at the root of the tooth with cow's milk or cauterize with fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Cauterization with border is that you take cow' s milk and heat it up, then apply that hot milk to the root of the tooth, and then wrap it in a cloth over the end of the tooth, and quickly dip the wrapped tooth into the heated milk, and let that hot milk cool down on top of the painful tooth until it is cooled down.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	Then repeat that application several times until the heat of fire reaches the root of the teeth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you see, then dip a hair or cloth into the heated border and apply it to the tooth, and then apply hot milk to that, and then let the heated border reach the base of the tooth' s cavity.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	However, the cauterization with fire is that you attend to the liquid of milk or iron, and that it is in the center of the tooth and the sharpness of fire does not reach the patient' s mouth.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	Then light the cauterization in the form mentioned above, and then apply it to the tooth, and let your hand be well held back so that the cauterization does not reach the patient' s mouth; and then, if necessary, repeat it a few times, as the pain persists for some time.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	Then, because of the impression that that patient' s mouth takes from the hot border and is held for an hour, then rinse it out; and this is the form of the cauterization.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	Cauterize at any extreme point that you can see.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	This is the form of the tube:
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	On the cauterization of an exostosis.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When the exostosis is made of slimy fluid and viscous fluids that do not respond to medicines, and you see its digestion easily by the sight, then light the cauterization in a curved form as mentioned above; having two open ends, so that the smoke of fire reaches one end, and apply that smoke to the abscess once, and if you wish to, from another end; then let it cool down on top of the abscess until it stops burning.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	Here is the translation of the text:
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	"And then clean that wound and bandage and wrap it up until it heals."
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	"And the shape of the cauldron or cauterizer is such that..."
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter III.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	On the Cauterization of Wounds and Constriction of Arteries.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When the moisture comes over the chest of the patient, and mostly when the air is cold, then it should be made to evacuate the patient at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize that place where the wound is located.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And be careful not to cause the cauterization to reach the chest or to burn the patient's skin with the cauldron, but only a little bit."
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	"And then cauterize that other wound with another cauterizer starting from the base of the neck at the last vertebra."
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	The cauldron should be made in the way described above.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	"And then clean that wound that came before it until it heals."
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXIV.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	On the Cauterization of Lung Malaise and Coughing.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When the cough and lung malady are caused by cold humors, and there is no fever or consumption, but it is an old disease, then cauterize that wound twice on the rib cage in the areas where it is located, and on the middle of the foot between two breasts; and the cauldron should be made in the way described above."
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	If you want, you can make your cauterization with a pointed instrument, the shape of which you apply to the point where the pain is in the ears."
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	Make points within those areas, and then clean that wound that came before it until it heals."
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And so be the cauterization, having three rakes, because cauterization is made in this way: according to this form, you can make three cauterizations:"
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	On the Cauterization of Itching that is on the scalp.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the scalp is detached by cause of lubricous moisture and does not return in its place within an hour, then reduce the detachment first, and then reverse the patient' head on its back or on its side; and lift up the hair that is on the sides towards the top of the scalp with your right hand, if the joint is dislocated at the sides, and with your left hand, if it is dislocated at the top.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And then make two rakes for the cauterization, and this is the way to do it:"
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	"And then cauterize the hair that is on either side within, so that it reaches to the other side of the scalp; and this is the figure of cauterization:
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	and then make a subtle point according to the amount of tentation; and this is the way to do it:"
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	"In some cases, it is adjusted according to this count, and for that reason, the rakes are made."
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	"Then pause over the cauldron for three days, and then apply the patient' hand to rest, and let the member not be bothered at all until it is healed."
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	If the detachment is at the sides and it is fixed, then cauterize over the muscle with a pointed or sharp instrument, because the joint is confirmed to be dislocated, and the moisture is running, and the patient' hair is healed."
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	On the Cauterization of the Stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When the stomach comes to the surface of the body and there are moisture entering it from its formation, and if you continue with your treatment methods and do not confirm, then it should be made that the patient is on his back, and spread your hands and your cushions, and then cauterize that wound three times: one rake of a finger on the foot according to the amount of a thumb, and two rakes on either side of the rake, within the triangle shape; and extend between those that are not adjusted to make them stronger."
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cauldron is according to the amount of two-thirds of the thickness of the hair."
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	"And be the figure of the cauldron according to this form, and if you want, cauterize with a large cauldron in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and this is the shape of a circle according to this form:"
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	"And then cauterize the stomach with a pointed instrument according to the amount that you want, and then clean that wound; and then clean that wound that came before it until it heals."
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	On the Cauterization of a Fetus' Death.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When the fetus' pain is caused by cold, or moisture, or heavy wind within its normal formation, and if it does not confirm to you, then it should be made that the patient is on his back, and spread your hands over it, and then clean that wound with water that we have mentioned, and do not confirm to it; then cauterize that wound three times according to this form, and this amount is written on the fetus' left side from the shoulders, and then let go of the patient' head."
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	"And be the space between each rake according to the amount of a thumb, and be the cauldron according to the length of the right side."
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	Do not press your hand on it during cauterization."
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	"And if the amount of water that has been added is according to the amount of half of the thickness of the hair, and it is not adjusted again; and if the patient is lying on his back; and if he is not sitting up, then let him lie down, which has already extended its cushions, and raise his shoulders."
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	"This is the shape of the cauldron:"
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	You can make these rakes with a sharp or sharp instrument, and it is possible for you to cauterize these rakes with caution and wisdom in the art."
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And be careful not to do too much cauterization, and let the thickness of all the hair be added so that it reaches all over the body, because the hair here is fine; and know how to clean."
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	On Perforating an Abscess in the Fetus by Cauteur.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When there is an excites or abscess in the fetus, and you want to know if it is in the fetus' flesh or in its membrane, then if it is in the fetus' flesh, the patient will have pain that increases with its growth."
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	If it is in the fetus' membrane, then the pain will become very severe and will fatigue your treatments."
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Then turn the patient on its back, and then identify the location of the abscess; and then clean that wound with water, and then apply the cauldron that has been made into strands according to the way described above in another page."
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	"And then cauterize that wound with a sharp cauldron and clean it so that all the hair is removed, and let it come out until it heals."
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	"Then clean those other wounds with this treatment until they heal."
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	However, I will use that method of cauterization in the text from which this form of cauterization is extended, and in addition to it, there are some bad humors that have been known; however, I will leave those behind that need it, but I will prefer this."
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter .xxix.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	On Wound-Healing.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	They said that the small cauterizer of the skin grafts for plauresi (wound-healing) is a good one to use in this way, and it should be a small one, long and thin, which can be found, and of the right thickness.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	And submerge that in oil and then hold it to the fire, and cauterize with a small cautery at that spot which is between the continuation of the furcula and the collar; and with two small cauterizes leave one slightly declining at the part where the beard is left, and with two small cauterizes at that spot which is declining between the fifth rib and the ilium, slightly declining at the parts behind; and with another cautery at that spot which is between the two thighs, and with three cauterizes at the spots behind; and with one cautery at that spot which is between the two shoulders, and with two small cauterizes at the sides of the thigh, leave the cautery which is between the two shoulders.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And do not cover that hand with a glove, but rather in the open air of the gloved hand.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And they said also that some men who use a cauterizer of iron resembling a ray and fiery should place that in that spot which is between the ribs, until we come to that apoplexy and it is completely healed away; and so I have said before at the apoplexy of the foot.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	But in this piercing with a cauterizer there is no fear, because very often it happens at that spot which is a fistula to which there is no healing;
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter.xxx.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	On Wound-Healing.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you heal the badness of the wound with water which we have said about healing in the division and do not confer your healing, then cauterize it three times or four times according to the length of the wound according to the shape of the cauterizes of the foot, the figure of which has preceded.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And be between each cauterize the thickness of a finger or a little less, and the way of the cauterize is the way which we have said about the cauterize of the foot equally.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not cover that hand with a glove, and the patient be sitting on his own two feet.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And another way of cauterizing, so that you ignite the cauterize having two points, which causes we have said in the chapter of dislocation of the muscle, and raise the glove which is in the edge of the wound the six fingers of the left hand without touching the patient's skin.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And be your elevation which is according to the length of the body, so that may be made cauterizes according to the thickness of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And then enter between the two points, ignite quickly in that spot which is within those that penetrate the glove from the other side.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	Then remove the cauterize; and there are four cauterizes then made.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you see, cauterize with a cauterize having three points.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	Then you heal the cauterize which has been put on that spot which had been burned by fire because it is more certain than other causes precede in the healing.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter.xxxi.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	On Wound-Healing from Burning.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	A cauterize is not made in burning, but rather it is made in four ways properly speaking.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you heal the burn with the ways of healing which we have said in the division and do not confer your healing, then cover that burn with a cloth; and make a cauterize on the four sides of the cloth and a cauterize over the stomach, and another cauterize over the thigh, and another over the wound, and two cauterizes between the two shoulders, and one cauterize on the right side of the leg, and another cauterize over the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the quantity of the depth of the cauterize be proportionate to the thickness of the glove.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	Then leave the cauterize on top so that you get a long-lasting bruise.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And you do not evacuate the patient' healing with water which covers for that spot so that those two entencios are added to it, and the third one is spun away by the helping healing.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The form of the cauterize on which is cauterized the belly be pointed according to that shape of that which has been cauterized before, and that with which is cauterized the two sides be olivared according to that which has been cauterized before its shape.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter.xxxii.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	On Foot-Healing and Wound-Healing from the Toes.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the toes are blistered and filled with clear water, cover that toe with a cloth; and do not twist it, because the clear water will ooze out. Then raise your hand to the height of the cauterize and do not twist it back again, because the clear water will drip.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	This is the form of the cauterize: And make two cauterizes on the two toes, and in each toe be made a cauterize at the tip of the cauterize-knife.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And be the cauterize according to the length of the toe: one at the top and another below the middle part of the toe, and above each toe two cauterizes.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	Then leave the wound healing for a long time because no water will ooze out from it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And heal that according to those causes which we have said.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter.xxxiii.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	On Abdominal Wound-Healing.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When the abdominal wound is caused by burning and wetness which melts the insides, it is the digestive and retentive virtue, which is in the stomach and intestines, and heal with water in the ways of healing and do not confer your healing, and sometimes the patient suffers a cauterize of the exhibiting virtue; then cauterize that with a large cauterize on the top part of the stomach according to what has preceded in the cauterization of the stomach, with a large cauterize on the circle and four cauterizes in the circuit of the navel, with a sharp cauterize; and with a large cauterize on the lower parts, or with two cauterizes.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if the patient tolerates abundant moisture and water, then cauterize that on the top of the navel and on the intestines, and firmly tighten three cauterizes to the stomach and one between the two loins; because this is a perfect healing which is not deficient in any way, and from which there is no return.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter.xxxiv.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	On Healing of Old Hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When the nature of the disease is of old hemorrhoids or a humor of grossness that leaks or of corrupted moisture, they are healed with water which we have said in the division and do not confer your healing, then cauterize with three cauterizes on the top part which is between the two shoulders and at the sides of the neck, and one cauterize on the lower part; and cut off the two extremities, because they are small.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if you think that the stomach of the patient is swollen and his food is not digested, and the face of the patient sometimes blistered, then cauterize that on the stomach with a large cauterize according to what has preceded; and one cauterize on the thigh, and another on the wound of the patient between two cauterizes; leave those cauterizes for some time, and heal that which is inside.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter .35
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	Of cauterization and the removal of their blindness.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you remove athma, then let your fire for the cautery be ready.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Then bring the fire into that athma which you have removed, and place your hand over it so that the fire can reach the opening of the vein from which comes the blood to the heart.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And make one or two cuts, since the cuts are many, then cauterize each one according to what we have counted, and quickly treat those that you have cut with oil within so that it is healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize a large cautery on the skin, then it heals more quickly.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter 36
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	Of cauterization of the fistulas that are made in nature during the separation of the legs.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not obey the work that we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by the water, then heal it with cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Then when any vein opens up in nature during the separation of the legs, and it is old, correct it with fire and wet corrupt things, and then put on oil that is fitting for the aforementioned subtle attempt, and remove the quantity of its depth from the front that is mentioned above.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Then light the cautery that resembles fire.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And place the lit cautery on this vein, and according to the quantity in which it is mixed with the attempt.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And repeat over that cautery within so that those bodies are burned up one time or two or three times, according to the quantity of your need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And beware of burning the nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes into the channel of the bladder or the channel of the intestine, then be careful of all those places; and do not pour water down there unless it is in a fleshly place and you think that it does not penetrate.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And quickly treat the area so that it is healed.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the place is sealed and you have removed the matter from it, and such has stayed for a long time, then know that it is completely healed.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the matter has not remained with it, then know that it is penetrating or it is corrupting it in the center of its leg, or water from those causes will come about which will bring remembrance to its place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter 37
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	Of cauterization of the skin.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When the skin itches due to water or rough wind, and because of this the patient becomes impatient, then know that you should cauterize it on the skin with a sharp nail from which remembrance can be taken.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And strongly cauterize it on the second with a small piece of string, so that three small cauterization lines will come out, and then heal more quickly.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter 38
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	Of cauterization of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When the bladder becomes inflamed and soft due to water and moisture so that the patient does not retain urine, then cauterize it in the front with a small piece of string above the bladder, where the hair of the perineum begins, and cauterize it on the right with one cautery and on the left with another.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And make the length of each cautery according to the quantity of the hair in the place; and cauterize it with one cautery in the front lower part of the two, or with two cauterization if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And make a sharp cautery as it is processed.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter 39
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	Of cauterization of the head.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When there is water and moisture on the head, and because of this, there is a prevention of conception, and the women's menstrual periods are disrupted, and pain arises due to the movement of their hair, then know that the place should be cauterized with three cauterization lines in the circle of the navel, as we have said in the cauterization of the bladder; and on the front lower part of the two, or two cauterization lines, and make the final cautery sharp.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter 40
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	Of cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When the moisture is viscous and moistened in the channel of the ankle, and when the swelling of its place is caused by the movement of its blood, and the sign is that the cushion is prolonged on the other when compared to it.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the dislocated place is turned in it.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then place the patient's leg in such a way that you can turn it with cautery on the outside of the ankle, and make a circle around it, as you will have understood from the attempt made in the dislocated place, so that the outside falls on its own place.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And make the cautery with which the form precedes in the cauterization of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this cautery is not to your liking, then cauterize it with three small cauterization lines, and with the olive cautery.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And make the cautery according to the quantity of the sharpness of the whole wound; and quickly treat that which is inside so that it is healed.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter 41
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	Of cauterization of the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain arises in the ankle joint, and it is caused by water and roughness, then wash the patient with water that we have mentioned, and if it is not effective, then know that the patient has a thick humor; and then cauterize it.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And the way of cauterizing in that place is according to two ways: either cauterize with burning medicine or cauterize with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	And the second is that you cauterize it on the outside of the leg with three triangular cauterization lines according to this shape, and make them deep.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And space between each cautery the quantity of the thickness of that one; and if the olive or large cautery is used.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	A few more times is the cautery over the middle place on top of the ankle so that it is four cauterization lines.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you wish, then cauterize with a large circle that precedes the shape in the dislocation of the ankle joint, and the one which is a large circle, and burn the sharpness of the whole wound.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	This is the way to cauterize sciatica when pain adheres to the ankle and is not extended within the cushion.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	And if it is extended within the cushion, then cauterize it with two cauterization lines on the outside of the cushion over the place where the leg joins that is the pain; and a cautery on the shin bone for four small ones, slightly forward from the center.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if the cautery is sharp, and make the depth of the cautery according to the quantity of the sharpness of the wound.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the patient becomes aware that the pain is extended within the joint, then cauterize it where he feels the pain with three or four points, or more if necessary, using a sharp cautery.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the patient becomes aware that the pain is on the outside of the leg near the shin bone, then cauterize it where he feels the pain with a sharp cautery.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And beware of cauterizing in such a way that you burn the nerves or cause great damage, and let it be known to you whether this cautery is beneficial or harmful; and let it not be done without your knowledge.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	You have already seen one of those which I cauterized on the shin bone and ended in cauterization, and the fire was heated within so that the swelling became small; and the fire pierced through it all.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And there came a great relief from the belly, and so it brought death.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two parts then cauterize each one according to this method.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And the wise ones said in the cauterization of water cauterize this, which is this way: make a circle of iron which its circuit is most of a palm; and it should be at its orifice according to the thickness of a date bone or half a palm.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And inside that circle there is another third part; and the space which is between them is the quantity of the nail of the hand; and these circles should be open from both sides; and the length of those hooks should be a nail or two, and make in those margins of iron properly fitted into the circles; and this is the form of it:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Then set fire to the iron inside that it burns and gives off sparks, and put it on the half of the water, the hernia placed over its edge.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And then cauterize this hand three times in one way.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then let that rest for three days; then apply the plaster to the wound and leave the poultice on for seven days; and then cure this hand with fire within.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Albucasis says: O son, of this kind of cauterization we have used little for the sake of keeping watch over it, and few have found those who look upon it.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	More of these iron cauterizations were applied to him who suffered them, and he turned his attention away from it.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	More of the medical cauterizations with iron hooks are that you make two circles, armed with a hook in which to put the nail of the hand; and let the length of the part be two nails or more than that.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the space between them is the quantity of the thickness of the finger; and they should be open from above and below, and let them contain themselves among themselves according to this form:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	Then place over the half of the water the hernia placed on its edge, and press your hand upon the other half; and take a tail of water between both circles, and the quality of that water is little fire little by little, until you have it for an hour, and let the patient suffer the pain and the burning of it — since this caused pain as when there is fire — until the pain stops.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	Then raise your hand up to the instrument and wash the tail of water off all the water of the foot with two-part water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	Then let that rest for three days and leave the plaster on until the burning has subsided, and let it run off with water; this is better in the end.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then cure that hand with fire within so that it is healed.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain extends into the crotch or the thigh, then make the cauterization in the way that it contains water according to how it was done on the half of the foot.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the way of tail water, and I have already written that in the treatise on the correction of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Take alkali and two parts of the other, half a part from one side, and mix them with a little water; and break the half of it into a new wave, and let the part which was broken come together with that which is whole, according to the quantity which enters it.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	Then break the other half into a new wave that comes together with it, and get it on top of the alkali and the strong water of two parts which you mixed, and then let you compress those by hand from above, and leave the wave which sends down the sharp water from the part which was broken.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	Then adjust all that water, and get it on another strong water and other alkali, since it sharpens that which is broken, the same way as fire sharpens; this is administered in small doses of medicine and in the cauterization of the other members, because the operation is like fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And thus from medicines some of which are cauterized broad, as well as the teazig and melannic and strong water with salt added to it so that they are mixed together.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And Guaglia reported about a man of old age the operation and the cure with which he was cured of foot pain and sciatica, and he said that there is no need for another cure, and that he was healed by one dose as well; since this is very effective treatment, because it was a strong medicine already known to him.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And it is that it be taken with a certain amount of wine, and if it does not turn green, then a little fig is taken; and it is mixed three times with a little salt and placed on the foot in which the pain is, or in the crotch or thigh, and let it lie.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	Then leave it for three hours, or for the quantity which the patient feels pain.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	Then put that in water, and then when the body of the patient is warm, put that into the sun, since the pain stops and it is healed.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And you should know that there is no need for any kind of cauterization with these medicines except to remove the contents of the body.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	More of Escorides says that when the vein is cut with a goat's foot, it is better to apply oil; and this cauterization is done with this method: take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it between the feet of the foot or between the joints.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	Then take a dry goat' s foot and ignite it with fire until it is red-hot, and then place it on the wool, and leave it until it is cooled down.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	Then repeat this water, and do not stop doing so until the sensation of pain reaches all parts of the foot.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this way of cauterizing is called cow's cauterization.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter LXXII.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	Of the Cauterization for Two types of Pain.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Some times the pain is in two parts due to two causes, because of the obstruction or the piercing or the excess evacuation, and because of those which resemble them, by the infusion of rubbing material and moisture.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And cauterization does not occur except in this single specialty which is done by the infusion of rubbing material.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Then it is done by the excess evacuation of the patient with pills that resemble them, which are made on both sides of the foot in three lines according to its width; since there are more or fewer cauterizations according to the quantity which comes out of the tolerance of the patient and the virtue of the water.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	Then let cauterization be done with a sharp point.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, cauterize with three cauterizations or four, the fourth being a middle one, according to this method:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter LXIII.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	Of the Cauterization at the Beginning of Gilbosity.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Here comes the first sentence to translate:
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And I see in the last spine of the back and the hips that it has already begun to rise over the others.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And when you see this and want to prevent it, then cauterize that cautery that is round according to this shape:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	so that the cautery takes up all of the spine's part evenly.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you want, cauterize in the circumference of the spine with a pointed cautery two lines or three.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	Then the points are close to each other.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	And then cure the area in which it is that we have said it can be healed with.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	Keep in mind that the cautery is not administered in yellow skin that is made by nerve spasms.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter .xliv.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	On Gout and Joint Pain Treatment.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And then, if gout is cured of its cause with a way of treatment and does not remain painful, then remove the cauteries.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And it's because you cauterize that evacuation in the circumference of the foot's joint with a few cautery points.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And it is a cauterizing olive of which this is the form:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pains push inwards towards the innermost or other joints, and when they are seen moving, then cauterize that on each innermost joint with three cautery points or four of all parts with this cauterizing olive.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if you need those cautery points that these cauteries are to your use, then cauterize that and don't press too much on your hand with the cautery beforehand, only surrounding the spine of the thumb.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pains push inwards towards the thumb and the second joint, then administer the cautery that we have said in the previous chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pains are only in one place, and it is called sugar, then make points in the circumference of the knuckle as it turns, making points in these two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if the pains remain in the feet, then make points on the circumference of the knuckles on each toe and on the top of the hand.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pains push inwards towards the sides by the space between the legs or muscles, then cauterize all of them on each side.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And do not evacuate the malady of good rule and reception of medicines, because if it is done with good rule and the inflammation is evacuated with this cautery, God helps it.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter .xlv.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	On Breaking Bones Treatment.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When a fracture occurs in the leg and the intestines are exposed before the hernia, and when it is beginning to move, then cover what you have said to the patient to stay in bed for a while, and that he uses lenitive measures so that the wound does not send from his abdomen.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	Then follow the patient between your legs on his back, and order him to keep his back warm so that it doesn't break or show the intestine or the bowel.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	Then return that to the small foot and hide it from the attempt of the fracture on the leg with a sign like a circle on the lower part of the spine that is divided into four parts.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Then light the cautery of which this is the form:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	in which it is a red thing and gets shiny.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area so that the intestine does not protrude.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient’s thighs and placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	Then pause the cautery on that sign with your hand to the side where you can control it, and then return it to the place where you can get the leg’s bone in the middle of the back; and repeat it to another sign if you don't succeed in the first one within the spine.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	Then observe wisely about the intestine’s evacuation during your cauterization, that you don't burn that intestine so that over the malady doesn't come to death or another great evil.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And you know that when you don't have the bone with the cautery, you do not perform your operation.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And cover that children’s cauterization is subtle according to their age and measure.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	Then cure the place of the cauterization for three days on the border so that the fire’s scar remains.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then cure that with the others in guenstiness within healing.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And the malady be present on the patient’s back for a hundred days within sealing the place and plague.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And cover that you pause the nutrition of it according to the length of time for the malady’s treatment which causes the patient’s stomach to move, and that the intestine doesn't burn outside due to the effort of healing.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	Then when you want to take it away after a hundred days, then administer it properly, and keep it for another hundred days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And it is a matter of work and replacement of food and drink, and of determined vigilance, because when this treatment is used with complete healing, God helps it.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And you order the treatment of breaks in other parts of the abdomen, and to begin it, and want them not to stop, then cauterize that break with a red cautery according to its quantity, and be that which is taken out of the spine also as the third part; then cure that with what we have said, and doesn'
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And already others say that the first break is cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, because it is marked by attempt:
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	And the line that goes for the thickness in the middle of the rupture is paused, and another line on top of it; then pause your hand with a nail, but the first cauterization is lighter and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter .xliv.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	On Twisting Treatment.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When it is twisted in the limbs by encasing or beating, and that pain persists for a long time and does not confer to the treatment with medicines, then you have to cauterize with a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And it is the cauterization of all limbs according to their size and age, and virtue and development, and location of twisting and pain.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	Then if the first cauterization is good, it is so; otherwise, then repeat it on that part; for, usually, these pains are caused by member punctures at that limb which comes closer to the body, so that you have to achieve those with cauterizations where the malady is healed.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter  .xlvii.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	On Leprous Treatment.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	The leprous spots are cured by a large amount of cauterization with great care if it is the leprous spot that is caused by fire’s decay and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And then when you want to cauterize that, consider if the leprous spot is caused by fire’s decay and sadness, then cure it with water that we have said in the division and don' t confound or fear about the malady which compromises all of the limb and whole composition of it, then cauterize that on top of the head at the middle place, and the second after them, leaving them behind; leaving them two in front and behind the end of the hair; and two on each side; and one behind, on the neck or server.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And last your hand with a little pressure on it until the bone is slightly injured, and the scarlets are moved away from it, so that the exhalation of thick vapors is relieved; and cauterize over the surface according to what is needed.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if the leper has already spread over the patient's body and appears clearly, then cauterize those that we have said above; and cauterize on the tip of the nose, and on two points under the mouth, and on two points behind the ears, and on two points at the base of the skull, and a large one on the top of the skull, and one on each shoulder blade, and two on each arm pit, and two over the muscles, and two over the tendrils of their feet; and cauterize all the joints of the limbs of the said parts and of the feet, and on each heel, and on the knuckles of the fingers.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And keep away from the nerves that are above the bone so that you do not burn those.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	And some of them are cauterized with one cautery on the bone of the little finger and another on the opening of the stomach, and another on the navel.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And you should know that the more you apply cauterization, the more it is healing and effective; and you should know that the patient does not feel pain in cauterization, for his body has already been numb.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And as the members and joints vary, so too should the size of the cauterization according to what has come before with the instruments.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then clean the cauterized areas with a mixture of egg white and salt, and apply the other treatment while it is still moist.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter. XLVIII.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	Of Stupor Cauterization.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When a limb is stunned or asleep and is treated with medicine, oils, and plasters, and it does not heal, then you should cauterize that stunned limb with the amount of cauterization that suits the size of the limb or the age of the person.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And let the small cauterization enter a little into the nitty-gritty of the matter.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then clean that with vinegar, while it is still moist, so that it heals.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And some of them are cauterized when the stunned limb moves to the limbs and joints, and to the spine, so that the nerves that carry it do not become stunned again, and the stupor is renewed.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	More should not be done to this than what is known about the anatomy of the limbs and the exit of the nerves throughout the whole body in motion.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter. XLI.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	Of Cauterization for Morphed Albaras.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When the albaras is old and does not respond to any of the medicine enquirries, then you should cauterize that with a small amount of cauterization according to the nature of the matter within, so that the whiteness and color of it are changed, and the color of it is altered.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	Then clean that with a mixture of egg white and lentils, with rozana oil and arnica leaves, and a little honey from the colts or from the yarrows, all mixed together, and bind it to the area while it is still moist so that it heals.
Capitol .l.	Chapter I.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	Of Cauterization for Crankiness.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When the crankiness begins and you want to calm them down, then cauterize that with a circular cauterization in the path of their movement.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	The wise said that it should be cauterized with the last cauterization in its own place; but I have not seen it, for I think that it is ulcered, and I have already seen it a few times.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	It is more appropriate to cauterize it in its own path with a circle as we have said, or with a small amount of cauterization.
Capitol .li.	Chapter II.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	Of Cauterization for Adultery.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When an adulterous person is delayed in maturity, and it is due to the excess of their desire, or their age makes them too old for procreation, or because of time, and you want to speed up their maturity; then cauterize it in its own path with a small amount of cauterization as a mark; and let it go, for it will mature quickly.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	But if you want to pierce it with cauterization, then set the cauterization of that as its form: and pause it in the middle of the adulterous person where it penetrates.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the cauterization is placed in that spot to relieve the pain of the arm, then clean that with something that heals it.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter II.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	Of Cauterization for Corrosion.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corrodent is walking corruption in the limb, which corrupts that as it eats dry wood with fire.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Then, if that corrosion is in a place where it suffers from cauterization with fire, then set a small amount of cauterization with sharp knife-like cauterization, and large amounts according to what is suitable for the spot where the corrosion occurs.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	Then cauterize that completely from the beginning so that you eradicate all corruption and do not affect any other cause.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	Then let it rest for three days, and apply a mixture of oil with herbs over the cauterized areas every third day until all the scars are completely eradicated and all the corruption is gone.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	Then clean that with a carn-generating ointment.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	But if after three days the flesh is born that does not corrupt, then stop applying cauterization to that which corrupts.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	Corrosion is treated with some medicines at times because that is half the treatment for cauterization.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	But applying cauterization with fire is much more beneficial.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	I have already said that the treatment for it is with acute medicine in the division, and so take that when you need it.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter III.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	Of Cauterization for Claws and the Rest of the Similar Features.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	A few times the claw of the bad-tempered person comes out, which is a gross cause and a door, which makes that person leave; and cauterize it in two ways, first with fire, and then with water tail.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	But cauterization with fire is what ignites the cauterization that resembles a flash of lightning, which is caused by iron in the amount that contains the claw from the beginning, and is of fine edges.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	Then let that ignite on the claw, and turn your hand around with the cauterization in the path of the claw so that the cauterization reaches its depth.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	Then let it rest for three days until it begins to burn the arm.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	Then apply a paste of crushed pomegranates with salt, and let the paste remain on it for a new day, because that will eradicate its roots.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	Then clean the area with an ointment of generating flesh so that it heals.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if it is not converted, and some times the claw appears on the surface of the body, mostly on the feet and hands, then know that you should apply in those areas with water, and that is what you take a little amount of iron or of a flash of lightning, and let it rest on the claw; and squeeze a small amount of water tail into it, and hold your hand, and turn it over so that the water tail comes out through the hole made by the claw's root, and then waits for the patient to bite it for an hour, then remove it, because the claw with its roots will be eradicated.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And thus I will make them ready for the other within which they come over all that they are in the body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	Then cure those pustules that the claws of the clogs remove with water so that the meat is not infected.
Capitol .liiii.	Chapter .liii.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	On the Cauterization from Shaking (Tremors)
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When one suffers from tremors due to friction in the nerves, or from a feverish cause by friction, or from another similar cause, then it is said that you should cauterize with four cauterizations or two on each side of the spinal column, placing one cauterization between each spine; and one cauterization on the feet, and one on the stomach.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the tremors of him shall be at rest, and the health of the disease by friction shall improve.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter.lv.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	On the Cauterization of Accidental Wounds in the Body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When in the body there are accidental wounds, and pus-filled follicles arise from corroded matter; then, at the beginning when it appears, let it be cauterized on all sides of the fistula with a subtle fire-tip, the extreme end being spread with fire; or with razors of long duration; or with a slow-burning cautery.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And some wounds are to be cauterized at the beginning of their discharge according to this manner; and they are not to be stretched out, and the excess fluid is to be stopped by making incisions, and those are to be healed from those.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	However, it must be said that this should be done with a bleedings tool.
Capitol lvi.	Chapter lvi.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	On the Cauterization of the Flow of Blood from an Accidental Wound by Incision of an Artery.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Too much blood is to be expected when an artery is cut, that is, when the plague (a wound) appears, or when the incision of abscesses or member cauterizations is made, and similar things, and it is difficult to repair those.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Then when it happens to someone, place your hand below the artery at the orifice, and pause it over that one so that the blood flow from underneath the arteriac thumb is stopped, and does not come out.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	Then place a few small and large olive-colored cauterizations on it, for many reasons, and exhale over those into the space where they are ignited.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And take from those a small or a large one according to the place and plague in which the artery is broken, quickly before the hand remains completely immobile, and so cauterize that wound where it has been ablated and stopped up with fire.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the blood is discharged from the arteriac orifice when you hold the hand immobile and exhale the cauterization, then take another cauterization, prepared in advance in the fire, and so on, stopping up that wound which has been ablated with fire.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And be careful not to burn the nerve which is here, and that it does not come over the patient's side another mischief.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And you should know that when the blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to stop that blood, and even more so when the artery is large, unless in one of four ways: or by cauterizing as it is said here, or by extraction when it is not extracted, for when it is extracted the extremities of him are burned, and that blood is stopped up; or that it is tied with a cord or a ligature by a strong contraction, or that it is placed on medicines of which the virtue is to stop up that blood; and those are twisted with the palm towards the heart.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	However, that which is administered by a cord and by a restriction from him has a more painful effect, and one should be careful not to cause it.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	However, if this happens to someone and there is no present medicine or remedy, then open the hand at the orifice of that vein as it has been said here, and understand the great contraction of him within which the blood is stopped from its natural course, and on the artery let not the hand remain immobile; and upon the artery let fire be sprayed with a very cold spray so that the blood congeals and thickens; and also let fire be applied to where it needs to be cauterized or to medicine as necessity requires.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Begin the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	On Incision, Puncture, Bleedings, and Plagues, and their Similarities.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are words of Avicenna.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	I have already said in the first chapter all illness for which fire is appropriate and medicine, and its occasions and causes, and the instruments with which to make cauterizations; and these chapters of the subsidiary chapters are arranged under the heads within the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And I will proceed in this chapter according to that method, so that what is wanted may be found easily; then upon this that it should be sought.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	In advance of what I am about to say here, know, and understand that in this chapter it is for fear what is said in the first chapter of Cauterization; and that which is before me, and know that:
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And know that in this water which is here with great caution, for in the operation described in this chapter there are many wounds that are caused by the discharge from the vein or incision on the abscess or opening of an ulcer or extraction of an arrow or incision of the throat, and similar things.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And all these are accompanied by fear and trembling, and at their head is death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I warn you that upon you not this water should fall, for some wounds are caused by the manner of men's hands, and many similar diseases.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And some of them are caused by the nature of their illness, and it is quickly taken from him by this water which is violent, and by the length of his illness, and at the beginning of his illness he is afraid of that which causes his illness; and death follows him for long.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And some are those who give you hope and comfort, but their illness is destructive; and his illness is pernicious.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And then I do not agree that you consent to this manner of men towards you; and your caution should be greater than that which is avoided, and your haste should be less; and do not assume any cause against him except a certain knowledge which certifies that water is harmful for you, and as far as it concerns succession, it is blessed.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And use in the treatment of all your illnesses by means of prediction and indication of him who is helpful in gaining fame and memory, in being praised and glorified.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Or children, God in you his understanding, and do not seek guidance or protection from him, for water is in his hand.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have arranged this chapter according to the chapters which preceded it in the Cauterization Chapter, of the cure from the head to the feet, so that what you want may be found easily from what is before you, and from what you need.
Capitol primier.	Chapter One.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	On the Cure of Water which is contained in the head of children.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	And you should know that this illness which appears in children is caused by the development and when the brain of the child is lightened.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	Some, however, are caused by a hidden cause which is not perceived.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	I did not see this illness in children except; and all those whom I saw were dying, and for that reason it was shown to me a work which is done in them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I saw that a child had its head filled with water, and that the child's head remained constantly wet until he could not stand it due to the size of his head, and more than the humidity made him sick so that the fire killed him.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this humidity or is added between the heel and the shin, or it is added below the shin over the Achilles tendon.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	For if the operation in that place is little humidity between the heel and the shin and pus there is none, then consider that you have to make a cut in your head's middle location on a fissure in length, and the length of the fissure is two fingers deep, and this is the shape of the sputum:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And therefore if humidity is increased more and pus is larger, then there are two fissures according to this method:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if humidity is left of the bone, it is an indication that you should make the corners of the head open completely and the water is pressed when you squeeze those from inside out and not up to your face.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	Consider that you have made three cuts in the middle of the head according to this method:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And let the incision take out all humidity; and strengthen the fissures with gauze and cotton; and pour oil from above on it every fifth day, and then clean the wound and dress it with ointment and bandage, and strengthen the head with equality; and feed the patient with dry food of little humidity so that the member is healed and cured.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And there is another way of incision, which you consider according to the size of the pus and the accumulation of water, because some cuts are in the back of the head, or at the front, or on the right, or on the left; and therefore make the incision where the pus and the water accumulate, and pour it out according to what is most possible for you.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that you do not incision the artery, and let the blood flow out from a wound of pain and cure the patient for this flow of blood to get rid of humidity.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter II
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	Of incision of arteries that are close to the ears, called iliacs.
Capitol segon.	Chapter II:
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When there is a rupture in the lungs or feet, and it is old blood, and you do not give medication to it, then the last cure for this is incision of those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And therefore when you want to incision those who have a headache from the back of the head, and rub the area with coarse cloth so that the veins appear, and consider where the pulse is; and the places on each side of the ears are pinched, and hidden in some men.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And then strengthen the vein by trying, and incision each one with a sputum from the middle of each side by making an incision up to the bone, and let it be through the length of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you want to, insert the sputum under the artery and turn it around so that the incision is on each side.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And let the length of the incision be two fingers' width, because when a vein is incised, it beats with a pulsating rhythm, which may stop because it is frequently beaten.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	More if the vein does not feel good to the touch, then consider that you measure the quantity of space between three fingers, and then try it, and cut it up to the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And this is the quantity of blood in one cup. and stronger blood does not give up so much or less, and this is according to the quantity that appears from the virtue of the patient and the accumulation of the vein.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And consider the pain, and if there is any cause in the Achilles tendon area, then incision it so that it does not cause pus.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And strengthen the pain with gauze and a drape bandage, and then clean that with ointment until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III:
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	Of the extraction of veins that are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When there is a headache from the left side or from the right side due to alcoholic or other causes, and it responds to medication, but you do not cure it, then we will turn to the extraction of veins in the temples or cauterization of those as if they were shown how to treat them.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the method of operation and extraction of those is that the patient rubs the hair in the temples because it is what is shown to him by his pulse; and the vein appears on the forehead because it is shown there by its movement, and it is hidden in a few men by its speed.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden from you, then the back of the patient should be strengthened with some cloth; and rub the area with a coarse cloth or evaporate the area with water until the vein appears clearly to you.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	Then take the following sputum:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then take the heel with that ease until you reach the vein; and cut it from the sides separately until you extract the heel vein and uncover those of the shoes which are left there, completely.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	More if the artery is thin, then wrap it with the end of a finger, and incision one from the side according to the quantity by which the ends of the legs are stretched and contracted, and do not give up blood because if they are not incised, the blood will not rise from the feet.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And then let the blood out of one cup. into three.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the vein is large, then consider that you tie it in two places with strong thread or rope, and do not allow it to break before the healing of the pain, and give up blood from it in front of the consolidation of the pain.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And then incision the surplus which is between two bands; and make it in that hour or another hour.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you want to, cauterize it with fire within the bone by cauterizing the ends of the legs, and keep that place where it has been cauterized.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it is better work than the patient has fever or it is a cold complex; for cauterization helps to end humidity, and therefore it is better in healing.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then consider the extraction of veins that are in the back of the head, and let them rest on a clean cloth, and then clean those with dry medications so that the flesh is healed and cured, and the blood is made clear.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if while you open another vein that comes out of the vein of blood from the arteria, then consider that you stop it by strengthening your hand until it stops bleeding; or cauterize it, or that you tie it up, and tighten your hand so that it stops bleeding.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if for any reason those are not with you, then pause the finger on that place until the pain stops hurting, and pour cold water on the wound until it stops aching, and strengthen it according to what is done.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And the time for blood to be extracted from a vein is that you cauterize the vein with two knives, because you have tied those two places together with a string, and pause each one, igniting it, until it reaches the bone, and incising the vein in two places, so that it is stretched between the ends of the legs, because they are not healed by that cautery.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	Then it will be sharp on both sides.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	But if there are less sharp points than two knives that fit each other properly, and do not cut the flesh quickly, then it is better.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Then with some thickness, the fire's heat is applied to it and the flesh is cut easily.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this work is better in all works and less laborious.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	Then the space between two knives should be a measure of the thickness of the flesh.
Capitol quart.	I capitulate.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	Of the treatment for sharp and acidic joint pain in the feet.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When the painful joints are caused by acidic blood that comes out of those veins that come from the top of the head and do not cause any problem with the use of medicine, and sometimes the face of the patient becomes red and it feels like there is a crawling sensation in front of them, as if it were an itch, and their feet are tired, so their hair becomes coarse, and their eyelids are scarred by the sharpness of the tears, we will not use this treatment.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And you command the servant to shave the hair that is on the patient's forehead, and make three cuts evenly spaced according to the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the cut falls on two fingers: the first cut is evenly spaced according to the length of the nose in the middle position of the forehead, and the second cut is according to the length of a little more than the movement of the eyelashes, and the third cut is on the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And keep your hand away from the incisions that are two inches long, and extend your hand from the continuation of both jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space between each incision is a measure of three fingers.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a thin sponge or dry cloth ready, with which to extract the blood.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	Then return the two sharp ends together, and this is the form of the incision:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	which begins at the first incision and finishes at the second one.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Then cut off all the tissue between those two incisions that is over the bone, and then make a smaller incision between it and the second one.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	Then use this sponge and insert it into the first incision, then another instrument that is called a knife, sharp on one side and blunt on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	Then lift up the jaw of that animal with your hand and bone behind it, and then cut it off at the neck so that it comes out through the small incision, and cut all the vessels that come from the head to the feet.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	Then continue the incision after the tendon has been cut, and then make another small incision between it and the other one.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	Then pour the blood that falls from a small quantity evenly spaced into the sponge that is under the incision.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	Then place a small knife blade in each crease, and place it over the dust that is mixed up with dirt, oil, and vinegar, and dip it into salt water.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	Then on the third day, cut off all the flesh and administer cold water, then treat the blood with basil-oil and other substances that make wounds heal.
Capitol .v.	I capitulate.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	Of the treatment for hiccups by catharsis and when the pain is caused by something coming out of the mouth from inside the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When the hiccups are caused by catarrh and continue, and sometimes the feet of the patient become tired, and already their appearance improves, and their eyelids become scarred and their hair becomes coarse, and in the front of the head there is an acute pain that feels like it is burning and coming out, then you know for sure that these things are caused by something that comes out from inside the head through the mouth.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best treatment for this is: command the servant to shave the forehead, and make a small incision in the middle position (and start the incision of the left temple within the right temple; and cut off the bone that is covered with skin, and extend your hand from the tongue), then open it wide.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Then dry all the blood with a sponge or a dry cloth, and then fill the incision between the two lips with a small knife or a piece of cloth.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	Then dip it in dirty water mixed with oil to prevent the wound from bleeding.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	Then when the blood has stopped and the pustule has shrunk, then know that it is time to cut off the bone from where it begins, and then treat the flesh with a mixture of flour and water, and four parts of colophony, and make a paste out of it, and administer it to the affected areas.
Capitol .vi.	I capitulate.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	Of the treatment for water that is caused in the ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	Any cause of water in the ears is one of four kinds, because it is either mineral and causes similarity to lead and copper, or it is plant-like and similar to hazelnut and fava bean, or it is fluid and similar to water and vinegar, or some animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	Then if lead or copper causes water in the ears, or if it is plant-like and similar to hazelnut and fava bean, then dip the ear on its own into oil of violets or sizami, and then treat with the extract, and make a sound like sneezing, and if there is a need for sneezing, then make the patient sneeze.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	Then place a few pieces of cloth or wool over the ear, and extend it upwards, because the movement of the wax is caused by this.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	Then if it is not caused by this, then treat with an extract of the plant called ghee, and make sure that you are treating the right ear. And this is the form of treatment:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it is caused by gesticulation, then treat with half a teaspoon of ghee; otherwise, treat with one teaspoon of double-boiled ghee.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	Then if it is not caused by water, then make a tube of metal and insert the end into the ear canal and close it with wax and softened oil so that it does not come out easily but through the tube.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	Then remove it carefully with a small piece of wire that is tied to a strong cord, because three times have passed since we counted the water that we have mentioned.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	Then if it is not caused by this method, then hold a piece of string or a small cloth around the ear carefully, and place a little quantity, and pause it with your finger.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	Then return it into the ear with ease, then dry the ear with a cloth.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	Then if it is not caused by the causes that we have mentioned, then you are a doctor who treats hiccups and spasms.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the way to cut it is that you command the servant to cut off the head of the blood vessel and extract it from the foot, and then make a small incision in the middle position, and turn the ear upside down, and dip it in water.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	Here is the translation of the text:
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	If the cause of the swelling is in the ear, which is caused by pus and infection, then administer the cure and extract it; but if you do not obey the doctor's orders, then take this subtle solution according to this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	and administer to that person the removal of the pus which is in the ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not pour water when you think that it is already moistened by the vapor of the ear, and put it in a bowl, and extract it with your nails or with a subtle tool, or cut off as much as possible, because it is easier to remove.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	But in the water that enters the ear, the patient should use sneezing before starting, and fill his nose with cold water, and blow it out over that ear, and if by doing so there is a discharge, it is good; and otherwise, then take two or three fresh peens and cut them according to its length, and wrap those in fire slightly, and let the patient put one of those peens into his ear and jump on that part a little, and strike with another peen over the pein which enters the ear.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	So that water does not come out until all the water has been discharged.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc .i., e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And already the water has been discharged, then take paper or a cotton wool ball, that is to say, and put one end of it in the ear and extend the other end towards the fire until it is burned.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And then put another cotton wool ball and pour water as many times as needed until all the water has been discharged, and wrap it with a cane as much as necessary to remove it from the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	But in the extraction of a beast that enters into that ear, if it is a small thing, then wrap it and remove it with a hook as we said above in the division; but if it is a big thing that causes pain to the whole head, then administer the extraction with nails and tools, and the cause of it is less serious than all other causes that enter into the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	But in the extraction of a vermen that is born in the ear, when you cure that with water as we said above and in the distillation treatise, and if you do not have confidence in your cure, then look at the ear towards the sun.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if there is any cause of the vermen, then extract it with a subtle tool or a nail, but if there is no cause, then take a long and wide cane as described above in the form of it.
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And insert the thin end into the ear according to the quantity that the patient suffers, and then suck it with a strong suction, and pour water as many times as needed until all the worms have been discharged.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	But if you do not obey the doctor's orders, then wrap it and close it up in the cane with wax as we said above; then administer distillation that has already been prepared for the treatment of worms, and look at water in the distillation treatise.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And be your infusion with which you pour the medicinal oils into the ear with this instrument, of which this is the form of it:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	Make it of silver or brass, narrow, and on one end, there is a small hole, and above it.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And then wrap it with a tape that covers the opening of the cane where it is necessary.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you wish, take a thread and wrap it around the end of it nicely with a knot, and then pour oil into the cavity of the ear, or some juice of any herb, or water that you want from these medicines in the cane – and that is in the ear –, and then insert the thread into the cavity and squeeze your hand to expel the oil into the cavity of the ear and the patient will feel it inside.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And water that is poured into the ear has already been burned slightly by fire.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And be careful that the cause that you will extract from the ear is not too strong, because the ear medicines do not tolerate water well.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter 7.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	Of Treatment of Ear Aching.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Some small children of old men are not pierced, and water has already occurred in some adults, causing pain in the middle part of the ear due to disease or meat, and this pain sometimes occurs at the entrance of the ear, and sometimes it is in the splits.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	That which occurs in the middle part of the ear, which does not understand the cause, is in difficult treatment.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in that which you can understand the cause, be careful to pause the patient' ear towards the sun and look at it.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	But if there is a lot of pain, open that with a subtle opening tool, which is described in this form:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the end of it is small in size, and one part is sharp and the other is not; and the blade is two or three nails long so that it does not cut the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	But if the aching is caused by hidden meat in the ear or in the middle part of it, then extract it with subtle nails and cut it with a sharp cutting tool quickly so that all the meat is removed.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	If the aching is in the entrance of the ear, then take a sharp, subtle tool and burn it slightly, and then put that in the middle part of the ear.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	But if the patient feels pain with water that he drinks and is not able to hear well, then try to press it easily; and be careful not to injure the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then pause the ear with wax according to the width of the cane that you have wrapped in Egyptian balm; and pour water a little at a time over it until you are sure of the consolidation of the ache; or take some herbs and crush them, and sprinkle them on it, and use it; and if the ear is already infected, then be careful to destroy the herb and replace it with another that is made with rose oil, so that the infection eases; and then cure that until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	But if there is a lot of pain, then dip a sponge or cloth in water and press it against the ear, and use the other treatment that we said in the distillation treatise to stop the pain, which is called:
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 8.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	Of Treatment of Achesil, Which Enters Between the Eyebrows.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	That which enters between the eyebrows of the person sometimes is wet, and sometimes it is dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	And if you have those with a high temperature or with nails, cut them into pieces with a sharp blade and then pause them on the affected areas.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	But if there is pain due to a lot of blood flowing, then you will cauterize those with a subtle, sharp knife.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cauterization is done with sharp knives and the blood flowing out is stopped when there remains any cause of bleeding; and when cauterized with fire, those bleeding are burned up and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter .ix.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Treatment for blindness that comes to the eyelids of the eyes:
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Blinding pain that comes to the eyelids of the eyes due to some cause which is combined with blindness and toughness, and for this reason it is called blindness.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	It is an addition of thick moisture on the inner eyelid, and above and below it.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Then the treatment is that you should consider if the blindness comes from above and below it, which is different from the pain on the eyelid, and the cause of it is unknown.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Then open that with a sharp knife from top to bottom, and remove it easily if it comes out, and cut off that which is attached to the other by means of a thread, and
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	But if you are not equipped for this operation, do not put it off until the pain has passed without any cause; and when the pain passes, then perform the operation.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the case is serious, then you should adjust it with a stitch; and treat that which has been injured so that it may heal.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is little, you will not suffer much from that pain, for the blood of it restores and heals it.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the blindness is declining towards the inner part of the eyelid, then remove the eyelid and cut off the blindness with a thread so that you do not suffer from the operation, and press that which is on all sides; and if the eyelid, by means of a cut, is drawn out, then there is no cause for worry.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	Then open that with water, and clean the eyes well; and treat the area with fire so that it may be healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter.x.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	Of treatment for blindness in the eyelid above the eye:
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Axe-injury is what happens in the skin of the eyelid above the eye, and most often affects children, causing them to weep a lot because they cannot see clearly.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And because of this, you often see things in a blurred way, and they sleep a lot; and on the inner eyelids there are moist hairs that already cover the swelling with air, and the appearance of a lump is visible when you press it with your fingers; and when you touch those hairs, you can feel the sensation of fire within them.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	There is a way to operate on that which the patient holds his head in his hand and presses it down with a cloth, and makes five cuts there, and from those five circles a part is cut off, and that circle is placed above that which has been injured so that fire can be applied to it; and then place it on the middle of the circle, and open that humidity which has collected there by pressing it with your fingers so that it may become solid again, and then open that which was closed by means of a cut from top to bottom, and the cut should not be bigger than the one that is made in flaubotomia.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	But in the case of a cold injury, you should cut off all the skin so that you can reach fire; for in the different positions of the body the fire is applied by means of a crack according to the shape of white snow.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Then take it off with the clothes that you have wrapped between your fingers, and turn it over from one side to the other while holding it in the middle so that it is completely cut off.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And remember not to press the crack too hard so that fire does not reach the eyelid and burn it;
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	But if fire does not appear at the beginning of the crack, rather than pressing it, you should place a small piece of cloth on the inside so that it may produce fire; and then remove it as we have said; and then dip the cloth in water and clean it with ashes, and place it over the area and press it with your fingers.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	Then sprinkle salt on it and place it in the cavity of the crack so that the moisture that has collected there is removed.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that which has been injured so that it may heal.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	But if it is a sudden injury with swelling, then treat that with a poultice so that it may heal.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter.xi.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	Of methods for testing the eye:
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When the eyelids of the eyes become swollen and irritated by the adjustment of the natural hairs, then test the eye with fire, or with sharp knives and threads so that the lid is opened and closed again, and this is called "tactininir" of the eye, and it is cured in four ways: either by fire cauterization; or with acute medicine as it has been said in the chapter on cauterization; or with a knife according to the direction of the eyes; or with straws, depending on whether they look straight.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And then place the head of the patient on your right hand; and turn the eyelid of the eye towards you with your left hand, and if it turns, it is good; and if not, put a needle into that which is faithful to the crack near the lid, and make the needle penetrate into that which is faithful from above, and it should be— close to the edge of the eyelid where there are no hairs — close to the hairs, and pull the thread through the lid, and turn it towards yourself.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	Then open that which is inside the eyelid near the hairs with a needle and thread so that it may reach the lacrimal major from above the lacrimal minor; then remove the thread and place it on the eyelid with small pieces of cloth or cloth, and press it with your fingers to check whether there is fire on the eyelid; and if there is such a figure as a crescent moon.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	But in any case, remember that the figure should be different according to the amount of swelling on the eyelid, because fire has been discovered among people, because those who have suffered from blindness do not admit that the eyelid has swelled to a certain degree.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	Then open that on the two lines you have marked, and begin from the lacrimal major towards the lacrimal minor.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your crack is close to the natural hairs in such a way that it is the width of a king's finger.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	Then place a piece of gold in one of the two corners of the cloth, and remove it completely, and adjust with a thread that is very thin between the two lips with yarn or fine wool, and wipe off the fat from the thread, and make it adhere to the hair above the eyebrows by means of a certain substance if you wish to do so, and if not, do not worry about it.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	Then leave the stitch between three or four days, and then treat that which has been injured.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you wish, leave the wound without suturing, and treat that which has been injured with fire so that it dries up and hardens, because the eyelid becomes swollen by means of a seal when there is swelling; but it is better to stitch it up well. And therefore say that the ancient methods of treatment are good.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	But in any case, it should be sought out on the patient, and it is a good operation, and it is not feared.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And another way of treatment is that you see on the eyelid such a figure as a crescent moon, and then raise the eyelid with three separate and close needles according to this form:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	But if that is not possible, use a needle, and if it does not close, take another needle with thread on the middle of the figure, and turn one end of the thread towards the lacrimal major, and the other end towards the lacrimal minor, and adjust the threads between your fingers so that they are equal, and then lift them up with a slight elevation towards the edge where it is open, lift all the cloth from that which has been injured by means of a slight elevation.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then he adjusts the two lips of the wound with a stitch, and he heals that part which should be healed.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	If however an abcess develops on your incisions or fissures, then treat that abcess with a poultice and a dressing.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And some times the eyelids themselves are turned inward so that you have to use an incision for them - a stitch is enough for this.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	To cut off hair from the face in the form of a mustache or beard:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	And you make two little needles or tweezers from the thread, the length of which should be according to the width of the eyelid, and the thickness of it according to the thickness of the eyebrow.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	You have already cut into the ends of all fractures, where you have the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Then add a little more of the thread to those ends which are too long from the eyelid of the eye, and tighten the needles on all sides with a sharp instrument, leaving one for several days; because if it is cut off by itself, it will rot and putrefy inside and go bad.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	But if the time passes on, then break the thread with a twine, and then heal that wound which should be healed.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	So when it is firm, the eyelid rises and does not prick.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is how to make two little needles according to this form:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and have the quantity of length and width neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter 12.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	Of the raising of hair on the face with a hook when the hair is hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When the hair is not natural, hard and sharp on the face, then perform the operation in the following way: take a very small hook, pause it on that thread which is subtle and soft and lean, and then adjust the ends of it with a needle in a subtle manner.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And be the length of the threads of a palm's quantity.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	Then you continue with another subtle thread under it, and pierce the ends of it if you want to.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	Then place the patient's head with his face toward the sun, so that your work is visible, because it is a subtle and small operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	Then he inserts the hook into the hair root with care, and makes it enter quickly into the eyelid from the hair that has grown out of the natural hair.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	Then pull the hair out from under it and make it enter into the eye, and the hairs be one or two or three, not more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	Then pull your hand from that place where the hair has grown out of the natural hair on the eyelid with the hair still attached.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	But if it is pulled out of the eye and not taken from the hair, then you pull it out of the ends with a thread that you have tied to it from that place, where it has been removed from the eye.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And then he will have good vision of the eye because you remove it from the place and tie it with a thread; so that each end is clamped down on it, and he leaves it for two or three days, within which time the hair adheres to its place and grows out from there.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if the hair is too long, then adjust a long thread from the natural hair; and raise it up to that place or, what you leave, so that its length is increased by a little space, and then you raise it.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter 13.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	Of the treatment of a bump on the eyelid above.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When there is a bump on the eye lid and it is hard, and it is drawn down from its place to the right or left part by bad consolidation of a wound or section or cauterization, and that is called leporine; and this either occurs naturally or accidentally, and is made by consolidation of a wound or section or cauterization, or by resembling them in an unfortunate way.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	And the way to operate on it is that you cut off that consolidation and separate the lips of it, and pause them in between which is a strip of cloth from linen, and tie them together so that they are healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And you do not use any cure for it from the causes which cause it to dry up or become hard; because if you make water return to it, it will become even harder than before.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	And use that which softens it: such as fenugrec, and immerse in water from which the herbs are high and salt of the sea; or brew a little oil, and dip in it the strip, and heal with it.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the treasure of your cure is that you perform all operations except those which are hard at the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation which we have described is nothing else than a correction of a bump that does not return to its form before it begins.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter 14.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	Of the treatment of a bump on the eyelid below.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This bump, which is treated on the eyelid below, which is called a "vertable" bump, and is either natural or accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	And if it is made accidentally by a wound or section or cauterization or similar causes.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	And the way to operate on it is that you take a hook with a double thread, and pass it under the eye from the tear duct on the left side into the tear duct on the right side, so that the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	Then stretch the flesh from its ends with the hook and cut it with the knife, and then you incise it with a wide knife.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	Then if it returns to its form as it was before; and no, then you take the thread and place it in the split of the eyelid, and then you turn the eyelids to their places, and make two splits in the middle of the eyelid below.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	Then the ends of the two splits in the middle of the eyelid below are made at different angles to the incision which meets them, and when their angles come together, it forms a figure.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this shape is the Greek letter: Omega.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	Then stretch the flesh out with the same quantity that is the width of it on each side of it, and hold it so that it does not close the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	Then he adjusts the separate parts and sews them with a wool thread; then he heals those with a soft medicine and water in which they have been soaked, so that they are healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	If the bump is treated by a split or stitch or cauterization, then know that you should make a flat split on the hair of the eyelid according to what precedes it.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	Then separate the two ends with a sharp instrument as we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the summary of the speech on the treatment of a bump which is above or below, and carry out the operation, according to how it is prepared as a bump, and that is in a form of different shapes.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the skilled person knows how to prepare himself at all times in such a way that it does not return to its natural form, or comes close to it, and prepares it according to what is required for the operation and the instruments which are most useful.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	Of the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation occurs in certain individuals so that the eyelid is firmly joined to the white of the eye, and interferes with its natural movement; then know that you should not meddle with the extremity of the ray below the eyelid, and raise it up or extend it outward from between those two parts.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And then you should cut the adhesion with a fine scalpel, which is not sharp in the incisions, keeping it obtuse so that the patient does not worry about the operation, and leaving the scalpel dull so that it does not harm the skin with its sharpness.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	Then your incision should easily remove that adhesion, returning the eyelid according to its natural form and healing all of the adhesion.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And then you should put seawater on it, which you wash with; or dissolve it in water from a spring that is dissolved in water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And then separate the eyelid from the eye with calamine, and place it on the eye with lanolin infused with aloe, and after three days use curative agents within that is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	On Eye Incisions and the Prominence of the Facial Bones of the Eyelids.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	You know that the eyelid is according to two manners, because it is either nervous, and is similar to hard cypher subtle; or it is not nervous, like white frozen moisture, which when it is touched, it must be forced out with an edge, and the edge is cut off, and the edge does not remain.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both spices do not begin until after the lacrimal gland, which runs little by little to cover the vision and prevent light from moving the eye.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	May the manner of working in this incision is that the patient keeps his head on his back, and opens his eyelids, and raises the eyelid to your hand, and collects the eyelid with a few double folds, and extends it to the corners thereof.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And then take a needle and insert it into that hair of horse or cow or milk, or of similar things, or of strong yarn, and double the end of the needle little by little and fix it in the middle of the eyelid, and pierce it with the needle, and fasten it to the yarn; and extend it to the corners thereof, and cut off that hair from the eyelid which covers the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And then you should follow that hair inside until the back of it.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And then you should cut the root of the eyelid with a fine scalpel or small scissors, and let the flesh of the natural eyelid remain so that by cutting it, there is not continuous flow of tears.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And sometimes the eyelid is spread with oil of olive or with strong yarn, thus: this has been said, and then it should be cut with a lion's scalpel, whose shape is:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And keep in mind that you do not touch the corneal tunic with the blade, and that the hole is made with the breakdown, and the pupil is pierced.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Then the incision should be made in the eye with a few drops of salt water or strong vinegar, and let that remain inside until it is healed; and then care for that with water that covers the inside, so that it is healed.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	If the eyelid is not nervous and you cannot put the needle in it, or if it is not fixed to that hair of yarn, then these medicines are used for such an eyelid, and they are cured in this way with eye and advice in division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to cut that off, then open the patient's eyelids and take a lion' scalpel, sharp according to this form:
am subtilitat.	with subtlety.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if that eye is rarefied and is contracted and is placed in the root of the eyelid, then it is dissolved with the oil of olive or strong vinegar, and the eye is left inside until another day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	Then repeat the operation on that until all of it is removed, but if not, let it remain, and then care at the beginning for the swelling, because then you should let that be, and heal that at the beginning.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	Then repeat your operation on that with reason so that it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The prominence of the eyelid, if you see a lot of damage in it, should be suspended with yarn; and cut that hair from one corner, and do not finish the incision so that tears do not flow.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	Then dissolve in the eyelid strong oil or olive oil until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	On Incisions of Eyebrow and the Water that Is Born from Meat Tended on the Eye.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Some eyebrows are born on the eyelids, and they are placed close to the pupil, or brought closer or further apart on the eyelids, and the eyelid is held together at both sides by rope of yarn, and assembled with a knot at the base of the eyebrow.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	May the operation be that the patient keeps his head on his back; and open those eyelids, and collect all that meat with a sharp edge, and then with a forceps or basket; and then cut off that meat little by little until it is finished with the incision, and keep in mind the eyelid so that you do not injure it with your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And your incision should be the one that cuts those or with a scalpel which we have mentioned in the incision of the eyelid, or with small scissors whose shape is that described for this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Then when your incision is complete and all that meat has been removed, then fill the eye with salt water, or dissolve it into powder that looks like the medicine's corrosives, and place it on the eyelid at both sides with aloe until it is secured from swelling.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if any cause of eyebrow is cut off, and you fear swelling, then leave the eye alone, and heal that swelling with water that softens that swelling, and then repeat your operation on that until it is healed, and shape the meat that occurs in the eyelid of this kind.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	However, you must remember that all cure for the eye is done by natural or accidental means, be careful, and do not place your hand in any of these operations until you see that the member suffers from them.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	On Collection of Sabular in the Eye.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	The sabular veins are red and thin veins that run on the eye, and they prevent from injuring your operation, and they are seen for a long time.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Then it is necessary at the beginning that you consider if the eye in which there is sabular is strong and has another disease besides the sabular, then collect that sabular.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And it is that you command the patient to keep his head on his back, and suspend those veins with a yarn of two according to your prudence; and be that yarn of two subtle duplication according to this form:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or two yarns gradually in one place according to this form:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	Then those veins should be collected with subtle scissors, with subtlety, and abstain from shaving the eye for a while, so that those veins are not removed from the eyelid and are shredded.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And keep in mind that you do not injure the eye with the edge of the scalpel; and if your operation is in the morning before the sun rises, and be steady in your operation so as not to cut it off with those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you are finished, then dissolve in the eye strong vinegar or olive oil so that sabular is removed with it.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	If water is not possible to collect at that time, and then collect all of it with a forceps until the pain of it has subsided, and leave it for a few days so that the pain of it is eased and the swelling is secured.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And let him repeat the same manner as often as it will be necessary until he is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	This is the form of the scissors:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	On reducing a hernia to the nose.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you treat acute hernias with either cautery or medicine according to the sequence of events and it does not heal, then let them be cut off at the root, and that you remove all the moisture that is in them and which makes them come out, so that the bone be uncovered.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And therefore, when the bone is exposed and becomes black or infected, then cut it off with this instrument whose form is as follows:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	It is called a sharp cap, and it shall be made of iron, and the cap should be round in form, so that it may be made to point with a file or with a fine point (so it should be in the following form).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And place that over the spot where the bone has rotted away, and move it back and forth between the toes, and press your hand little by little until you feel that the corruption is rough.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And some drops should be made, and then restore the area with drying and tightening agents.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	Then if the place is consolidated and good flesh covers it, so that the hernia does not break through the skin and the opening is small, for ten days, and then it has not broken open or become inflamed, you will know that it is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And otherwise, then it is not healed but to reduce the opening to the shape of the nose, and according to this manner: and that you uncover the second bone with either cautery or acute medicine, and when you have uncovered the bone, then let them follow this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	The extremity of the iron should be triangular, and the handle should be slightly curved at the end.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	And place that over the bone, and let it be near to the lacrimal; and extend your hand slightly towards the heel, and move your hand back and forth against the tribe until you feel the patient's pulse pulsing through the osseous part, and that you hear a sound like wind that blows through it when you move your hand.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Then restore the area with drying medicinal substances  to stop the bleeding.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Then when the flesh in that place has healed over, then the substance which comes out of the nose should be made to run again into the nose, and when it is thicker, then make it thinner with a liquid.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	On reducing a protuberance of the heel.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the heel protrudes completely and nothing happens to it or there is no decrease, then let you loosen the lacing, and then let you follow these orders, and then let you pause with wind in the throat for a good reason; and then place an ointment on the heel made of acatra, aloe, oil, and sarcollo, and then tighten the plaster over the heel with fine powder.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the manner of the powder is that you take sheets of linen cloth, and each sheet is doubled up four times; and make these sheets from the above cloth.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	Then place those on top of each other according to the quantity that the heel requires.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	Then place those on top of each other with a hard, tight cloth; and then let you follow the order of wind and sucking for sacrifice; and then remove the winds and leave the heel to dry for a day or two.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	Perhaps if the lacing becomes soft, then let it be tight.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	Then remove the lacing when you have dried it out.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if the heel has already been reduced, then it is well; and otherwise, then let you repeat the ointment with the powder and the tightness and the wind, until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	On incisions of a protuberance of the eye lid.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When there is an obstruction in the eyelids, and it protrudes, cut it off with a razor, and it resembles the shape of a man from the water; and let the blade go into the root of the eyelid on the side near to the lacrimal, and then let the blade go into another where it has double threads, and make that one go in; and then let you cut the place of the double thread and tighten it with a knot; and then make the incisions of the other eyelid following its contour; and then tie up that one.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	Then remove the blade, and place it over the heel, infused with wool mixed with milk of sheep; and leave it until it hardens.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then cure the heel with water that comforts it within so that the plague is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	Some eye lids accumulate a lot of fluid around the whole edge, and then it is pierced with a fine needle that enters the root of the eyelid, and then the moisture is drained away, and the lid falls down and disappears quickly.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	Then let it be tightened so that it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De curacio de alconati.	On the treatment of cataracts.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This disease, which is called alconata, is nothing but a disease that resembles descending water and it does not belong to it.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	The manner of the work in it is that you make the lacing come down from the upper part of the eye lid and go up to the two halves of your fingers, and then let it be tied so that you do not see the patient' s eye; and then let it be dried out and then open the eye, and then let the patient look around with his eyes.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not come down in the lower part, you will know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	And if it is not prepared with water that you have mentioned, then make the lacing come down to the edge of the eyelid and then place a fine needle on it, and then let it pierce the eyelid slightly, going through the cornea, in the area near to the white part (in the edge of the eye lid) until the disease is removed.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Then when it has been removed, you shall distill in the heel water that you have mixed with honey or water that you have already brewed with fenugrec and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	Then let him be cured of other diseases until he is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	On the treatment of descending water from the heel.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have mentioned the spices of the water in the division and which are to be boiled with the herbs, then let those follow for healing.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Then let you make the lacing come down between your fingers on a piece of cloth, and then tie it tightly with the heel that is exposed; and let him lie down on his side.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	Then place your hand on the eyelid of the heel that is exposed on the side where the water comes from; or on the right side if the water comes from the left heel, or on the left side if the water comes from the right heel.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	Then place your hand on the right side with a palm towards you if the heel is left, or on the left side with a palm towards you if the heel is right.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	Then place the end of the finger near to the root because of the thickness of the eyelid on the side of the lacrimal, and then press it towards you with power, and then move your hand back and forth against the edge.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	Then let it penetrate into the heel and feel that the water has come out because of the pain.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And then let you measure the distance of the path of water to the edge of the eye lid from the pupil to the end of the color, and that is the root of the heel; for you shall see with that eye the vision of the heel through the clarity of the cornea.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And if you put the alum in a place where there is water, and if you throw it down a hole once, and if the water comes up soon enough, then remove the patient from where he is, so that the alum falls into his wound when he moves.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And if you pause for a moment, then if the water comes up again, then remove that other cushion before alum is thrown.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And if it does not come up again, then take the alum out slowly, and with your hand rub the wound inside slightly with clear salt from a gem and wash it with water; and then remove the cloth or stop the wound or wrap it in wool soaked in rose oil and white wine. And place it outside the hole.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	May they who are of our time pause on that with white wine.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if you don't obey your alum to the instrument of the wound due to its hardness — for it is some of those people whose wound is hard sometimes —, then when you take the spatulum that is called alberid, and this is the form:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And then pierce that intersection with the spatulum, and do not stop your hand in the trauch, and do not stop unless you put alum at that spot.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	Then add alum according to what we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And you should pay a compliment on your work, prepared in the patient's bedroom peacefully, and refrain from all movements.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And pause in nature for it to be smooth, and do not hurt the patient' head to the left or right.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	Then add the alum according to its disposition within three days.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	Then take it away from that dark room and examine the patient's face carefully, and then return the alum within a day. vii.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And do not say that you should add water at the time of cure or shortly after adding infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	While you are away, add water because the water flows gently from a high place and with great force in regard to it.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	May it happen that you find a swelling, then when you take the wound away from the seventh day, and adjust it with water to remove the swelling.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Then return your hand and pause over the patient' face by which it is received from them for several days in that dark room.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	Then you will be well with that room gradually, and consult about its causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And know that in alchemy it is not allowed to avoid vision some times, and then you are diligent with the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And it has come to us of some of those who are of Artax, and some said that it makes fire in the Airac magic by piercing it with alum, which causes water to flow out.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	But it seems that in our land there was not water which had done that, nor the water which came out of some of the ancients' treasures; and it seems that this is new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of magic spices, in order to place them on those who do not know them:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And they are made of iron or metal properly, and the extremities of their hand are in this triangular shape, that is to say, with the tip acute, so it is done.
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter 24.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	Of the cure for meat in the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When in the nose are hidden meats that are adjusted from which there is some cause, which is assembled to the sign of many feet or to a pollen; and this bad condition is called pollen because it resembles the appearance of that foot represented.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And from it is meat cancer, lappet, of a red color; and not from it is meat of a lion of a reddish color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Then in that which is not fraudulent or cancerous meat among these lions, pause between your hands and place it in the shade, and open its nostrils, and cut the nose at the tip into those meats.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	Then take that away from the other side beforehand, and cut it with a sharp knife carefully, so that you know all the meat is gone; if by any chance it remains, then take this water easily into one of the instruments for cutting carefully, so that it does not leak.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	May it happen that you find a swelling at the time of cure or shortly after adding infusion, then pause taking water; or if it is a malignant swelling, then cut and cauterize it carefully within that it has been severed in several places, and all the openings are sealed.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	Then add to the nose near the incision half a grain of pepper and water or vinegar.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	May it happen that the nose is open and you see moisture coming out of the palate; then know that it is already cured.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	May it happen that the moisture does not penetrate according to what we have said, then know that inside there is no meat in the upper nostrils where it has not been severed.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Then when you enter faithfully into the fowl, and cut it into pieces, and pause between each piece the quantity of the said or less, and cut the meat at one end of the fowl in the nose by the bone or for any other reason that is possible;
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	Then when the water has come out, that it be smelled within that it reaches to the nostrils, and be put on its belly, because many children by such an action are led to schools, and there is no cause for that person who wants to do it.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	Then pause the two extremities of the flesh, one end that comes out over the nose and the other that remains in the nose, and then add minced meat to those ends, and put water inside that you know the meat is already at the tips of the fowl;
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	Then take the flesh away, and pause in the nose before severing the tip of the meat into three pieces, and put water inside for three or more days within that it becomes warm;
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	Then when the cause is finished, pause in the nose a tube of lead for many days until it is cured.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	May it happen that you use this cure if you find it effective.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the instrument for cleaning and making water and medicines in the nose:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	Then water of silver or iron, which resembles a small torch lit up, so with a small bowl, and the meat resembling it.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you want, make a closed tube like a cane, and the tube of the instrument for cleaning is flat and open; hold it with your hand at the back, and when you want to use the water or oil from the suction, you will not be able to see it.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And these are precious spices for cleaning: honey, white wine, ginger, licorice, and pepperlong, and mustard, and fennel seed, and aniseed, and caraway seed. Then come with blood and calcium sucks, and let them be pills, and one pill be taken with water on an empty stomach, and put in the nose towards the back;
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter .xxv.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	About the nostrils.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Mottos seen in the extremities of the nose, and it is magnified and omented on various days within which mott it is laid out in the regard of him.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And so that you do not miss anything in the beginning of its appearance, and inherit everything.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	Then pause on the spot or use a cauterizing or burning medicine which was on the spot of him.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	May it be delayed in its incision before it is magnified, consider if it is lapidated, hard, of scaly color and of little feeling, then do not touch that with fire because the apostema is rotten; for mottos seen in the extremities of the nose, and it is a great malice over him who has it.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the apostema is of a lion touch and not of a scaly color, and sometimes that incision is possible in all of it, then empty the patient and incise it with fear, and cure the spot with water which comes out and constricts within which is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter  .xxvi.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	Of the suture of the nose and of the lips and of the earlobe when the continuity is dissolved by plague or by similar things.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	Know that when it happens solution of continuity in one of these cartilage, little confer in that operation but in some men.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when it happens to some for a certain cause of those, that you consider if it is a fresh plague and then you adjust the two lips of the plague with the suture, and then cure it within which is healed.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the lips of the solution of continuity are already separated, and each is healed well, then consider that you remove each of their knots apparently within which does not escape a plague.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then adjust the two lips with the suture and strengthen them, and over them sprinkle the plague of dragon and anoint it three times, and pause over the powder a pes of plaster diafinicon, or of some other of the consolidating plasters, and leave it glued for two days or for three, then remove it and replace that plaster and leave it within which they are per se healed, and then cure it with oil within which is healed.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	May the way of the suture is that you add the solution of continuity or by needles also as it has been described in the suture of the belly, or add the solution of Continuity to the fiel also as it has been said to you and let it know.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter .xxvii.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	Of the extraction of those causes that come in the two lips in the parts inside.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Mottos seen in the insides of the two lips of some men are apostemas hard similar to fat of errors, and some of them are small and some are large.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Therefore consider that you smooth the lips and divide each of those hardnesses of all parts, and then the abscission fill the place with three times within which the plague is restrained, and then wash it with vine acid and cure the spot with water which is astringent within which is healed.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter  .xxviii.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	Of the incision of the flesh adapted in the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Great care the nostrils are cut above the meat adapted which the young appeal to the white, therefore consider that you suspend those with a nail or that you have them with the forecords and incise that from its root, and let the blood run or the plague.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	Then pause on the spot three times or other powders astringent or exfoliative.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if that meat returns, then incise it again from another side, and cauterize it for it will not return with cauterizing.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter .xxix.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	Of reasons of teeth by iron.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When in the surface of teeth of the insides and of the forums and between the gums are adapted rough edges, smoothes, and some seen are black and are formed citrin or green within which the gum moves by water and the teeth are formed smoothes.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And therefore consider that you file between your teeth and pause the top of him on the thread, and measure the teeth in which appear those rough edges and causes similar to sand within which is not caused by anything, and then it forms the blackness and the citrinity and some others within which are mondified.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	Therefore if it is water that is in those of the beginning of the reason, then it is not; and if not, then you repeat the reason over those to another day and to the second and to the third within which comes to the last statement in which you want.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	Know that teeth have need of many resources of different shapes and of many figures according to what is prepared for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And therefore because the reason with which the tooth is cut from inside is different from the reason with which it is cut between teeth according to other shapes, and these forms of reasons are surely prepared that you will see soon enough.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter   .xxx.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	Of the eradication of teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	Consider that you cure the pain of the tooth from all its causes and delay in any eradication of him, because there is no cause that replaces the substance of him when it is eradicated, for it is an excuse in the eradication of him.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	May consider that when the patient is forced to eradicate that tooth, firmly you must be certain what tooth is painful, because the pain disenchants the patient and causes him to believe that it is in a healthy tooth, and then eradicate that one and let the pain not cease until the painful tooth is eradicated, for we have already seen this by operation of barbies.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Then consider that you are certain what tooth is painful and that you know it well, then consider that you scarify the root of the tooth in which there is no virtue within which is dissolved from the gum of all parts, and then cut that one with pliers at a small beginning little by little within which comes to the concaved.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	Then fasten with a strong knot large by good speech or loud noise, and pause the top of him between the threads that are not yours to cut him away, and then fix the tooth again from another side in a way that does not break it, nor give pain to the other one.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And if it is not форо-getat, then take one of those instruments, and put that from him from all parts with ease and force the removal of him so as it was done at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	May it is a rotten tooth or corroded, then consider that you remove the cloth of him from all parts with ease and strings that do not cut in the hour of your constriction on it with pliers.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	Then consider that you open with great care in the root of all parts of the gum and save your strength to not break it and does not cause a fracture in the beginning of him, and return to the patient for his maliciousness is less than the first pain of him.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And consider that you do not make water come out of those barbers in their lastness and audacity on the eradication of them, because they did not administer water which we have described; for mottos seen come out on the men with big plagues which are harder to cut, and the roots of them become whole, or some of them, or extract that one with a certain number of teeth from the mandible in the same way as Mottos have witnessed.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And then wash your mouth with salt water or vinegar.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if there is swelling and pain in the eyes due to heat, then sprinkle some salt on the affected area, and if it does not help, cauterize it.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The shape of the tweezers and forceps should be smooth and fine at first, with a long handle, a short handle, and a thick grip, so that they are not bent when used.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And then, with short handles that are not bent when you use them for the first time, have fine tips at the end.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And they should be made of iron from India with fine tips at the end, and in those tips some have teeth that interlock with each other and tighten strongly, and some have a groove like a bird's beak, which is good for holding.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter .31.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	Of the extraction of teeth and breaking of bones in the jaw.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you must extract a tooth that is broken in the jaw, then cover that place with a bandage and leave it alone for a day or two until the place softens; and then insert tweezers or forceps, the form of which is like a bird's beak, and the tips of which are fine:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The ends of them should be fine with emery or sandpaper.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if you do not obey him by using these tweezers or forceps, then cover the root and dig out the instrument which is called an awl, so it is a small lever whose shape is like this:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And have a thick end with a small lever, and not be bent so that it does not break.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	So if the root is hollowed out, it is good; and otherwise, help yourself with these other instruments whose shapes are these: the first instrument has a triangular end with some thickness:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The shape of the second instrument should be that it is triangular and has a small point at the end.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And you are helped with this instrument, having two ramps whose shape is like this:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	And with other instruments which will be used to shave teeth; because it is made with this instrument which is formed like an awl and is made of iron:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	of the triangular end that is curved or short, with some thickness, and not be bent so that it does not break.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And you should know that the dental instruments are similar to other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	The skilled artisans and craftsmen who work in this art are wise and skilled; they invented different instruments and procedures for themselves because the small ones did not know or pause on their own instruments due to the various forms of their work.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the bone of the jaw or any other bone in the mouth is broken and needs to be fixed, then cover it with a bandage at the right place for him who knows it well using the instruments and forceps we mentioned earlier when extracting tooth roots; and help yourself with these gestures whose shape is like this:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And it should be of small thickness to the little and large, and fixed or tightened with a bandage around the mouth so that it does not move or escape, until all the bone is hollowed out; then restore the place with suitable medicine for him.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is small fracture, then fix that fracture with wood from the same tree and the blackness of it; and heal that place within until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter.32.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	Of the treatment of prominent teeth next to others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When the teeth are prominent beyond their natural place because of which shape is long, and more so in women's mouths and especially in elderly women; then cover that tooth; but if it is not attached to another tooth, then cut it off with this instrument whose shape is like this: it is similar to a pig's ear, and made of iron from India with a sharp end.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And it should be your incision that you make on that tooth in three days because of the hardness of the tooth, and not be joined to any other teeth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if a prominent tooth is difficult to cut with a file, then grind it with a file of iron from India whose shape is like this:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And it should all be of iron from India; and with pointed tips, cut the tooth little by little using sandpaper which is made into needles, cutting the tooth slowly day by day with ease, so that it is not joined to any other teeth and splits.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	Then polish that tooth well, and fix it with a small screw-shaped nail.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if a tooth has one side broken and the tongue hurts because of it, then cover that place with a bandage where the sharpness of that section is stuck and flattened so that the tongue does not hurt or change the word.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter.33.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	Of restoring damaged teeth with gold or silver wire.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When teeth are injured by impact or fall and cannot be fixed with stringent medicine; then fix those teeth with gold wire and not silver, because silver turns yellow and hardens quickly; but gold does not change in color and does not harden as quickly.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And the wire in such thinness and thickness according to the quantity that can be inserted between teeth; and the shape of the cut is that you take the wire and double it between two healthy teeth, and then increase it by twice as much as the broken tooth between two good ones, or if one or both are missing, until it reaches the thread on a healthy tooth on the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And then repeat the procedure in the same way to the other end of the tooth which you started with; and tighten your grip more easily and more gently until it is not too tight.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And your tightening should be done so that the wire does not slip out of the roots of the teeth which you are closing.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And then cut off the excess wire with scissors or tweezers; add it to other waste materials and hide them between the healthy tooth and the broken one, so that they do not harm the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	Then let that stand still as you have tied it.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	If it is loose or broken, tighten it with another wire in such a way that all the time it takes to do this.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	This is the shape of teeth and the figure of the repair of two healthy teeth and two broken ones, as these are tied together:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And if a tooth or two are broken because of a fall in which place it hurts, and the shape of the figure of the wound is like this:
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	This does not make a skilled and wise person.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	Some are adapted to some cause of cows' bones, and is made like a tooth; it is placed in the place where failure occurs, and is tightened as we have said, and remains fixed to that for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter.34.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	Of incision of the thread which is seen in the tongue and prevents speaking.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This thread which leaves some or all of your tongue exposed is due to a wound; it is intentional on the part of the person; or it happens by accident because of illness and the infection has already been established.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation on him is that you open the mouth of the patient, the existing hat in the thigh; and raise his tongue, and draw back this nerve according to the thickness within which the tongue comes out from its recent.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	But if in that there is any hardness or denudation, and it is standing for the consolidation of plague, then you pour oil and cut it according to the thickness within which you have cut the nerve and the nodule is dissolved.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And be careful that a fracture is not made in the bone of the flesh and that you do not cut here as it burns and brings forth flux of blood.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	And then wash the scars of the incision with warm or cold water or rub them with water; and place your hand over the tongue; if it is not healed, keep the patient with his tongue in any way that it does not harden again or be infected.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	But if a flux of blood occurs, place on the spot virgins water; but if the blood comes out, then cauterize the spot with common fire which is brought to water.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	Then heal this one and the other causes before it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	On the extraction of the hernia let go the tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Some scars are left behind the tongue, similar to a small hernia that prevents the tongue from its natural function; and very strong is that which fills the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the operation on him is that you open the mouth of the patient, a hundred steps before the sun, and consider the swelling.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you make him of dark or red color, hard, to which the patient does not respond, then do not touch that one, for it is bitter.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it is turned to white, in which there is moisture, then you put oil on it, and cut it with a sharp knife, and cut all of it; and if blood comes out during the operation, then you stop it with virgins water, for common fire, within that it be stopped.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then return to your work within that you have treated him with kindness, within that it is washed with cold water and salt; and heal this one with the other cure in water, within that it is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	On the extraction of two earlobes and on that which is nothing in the hole, and on other swellings.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When the swelling comes out in the hole, then it is glands that are assembled, which come out early, and they are called two earlobes, which when you heal them with water that I have mentioned in the division, and if they are not healed, then consider whether the swelling is hard, of dark color, and lacking response, do not touch it with fire.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is red in color and the root is thick, then do not touch that one with fire because of the blood flowing out; let it mature within itself, and then cut it off or let her cut it herself.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is white in color, thin, and the root is fine, then that one is to be cut.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the operation on him is that you consider, in front of your operation, if he has already stopped the swelling of his tongue with complete rest, or if it has decreased; and then put his head forward, let his tongue be between your legs while you operate with a sharp instrument, which is this one:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	It should be made of silver or of iron, and it should be sharp with an edge.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	Then, when you press it with your hand, and the swelling appears to you, and you place the top of the tongue against it, then take oil and put it in the middle, and pull it apart from the outside as much as you can.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Or another water that does not cause any trouble, and place this one on the tongue, for this is the form:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	and it is assembled with forceps, however, the extremities of each one are sharp, so that the opening of each one is in the end of the other, pointed, which is made of iron tempered and tempered.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	But if this instrument is not with you, then cut it with a sharp knife, which has this shape on one side, and the other side should not be sharp.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And then, having cut one groove, cut the other according to this method of cutting, and then let the cutting of the tongue be with the water that comes out from rubbing.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if there is a flux of blood, bring forth water that has been boiled with hemlock or with mistletoe and apply it to him, similar to those causes within which the flow of blood is stopped, and then heal this one before it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And some scars are left in the hole, other swellings than those two earlobes, and cut them according to what I have said in the cutting of two grooves.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And I have already healed a woman of a swelling that was born in her hole, which swelling was red in color and lacked response; this one had already closed her hole, and the woman breathed easily, she had forbidden him to eat and drink, and she was about to die if water were not brought to her quickly.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And this swelling had already struck so hard that it had opened two holes within which it came out through two paths.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	Then I hid myself from them, and I took one of their oil bottles, and threw it at him, and a great amount of it hit him, then I cut off the tongue of him with my sharp knife, and then I put the oil into the swelling.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	Then I took a great part of it off, and there was not much blood flowing out of it.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Then completely I cut off the hole of that woman, and soon after, I drank water, then I did not stop cutting out those swellings one by one, and that swelling was replaced with another one, which I cut in place of it.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Then I went back and cauterized the hole of him, then I turned around and did not know what God had done for him.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	On the cutting of a hernia when it is swollen.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When the hernia comes out with a cry, and it is swollen and long, then let it be called a bulla; but if it is thick and round in its part, then let it be called a cyst.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	But when it is healed with water that I have mentioned in the division, and if you do not heal it completely, and this swelling has already become small and soft, then let you cut off what is joined roundly; but if it is long and bleeds a little, red or black in color, and does not respond to you, then fear cutting it off, for there is fear over the patient.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you see that one according to the method I have mentioned of its whiteness and length, then let it be with your hand that you operate its shape, and let you put oil on the new one, and pull it apart from the outside as much as you can; then cut off the end of it with a sharp knife, which has this shape on one side, and the other side should not be sharp.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	But do not cut it off with that one unless you cut it according to the natural term, for if you cut it further, then it is no longer yours to speak of.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And bring the incision knife, use that which we have described in the incision of two nails, and heal it within so that it is cured.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the patient is frightened by the incision of the knife, so that he uses engineering in the cauterization of him, his way is only with sharp water, and it is because you stop the head of the patient on his chest, and press his tongue to the instrument which we have said, and take from water which we have described in the cauterization chapter, and fill it into the concavity of the tool whose form this is:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	Be the extrimity of him concavity in which medicine is paused likewise with the concavity of a spoon, and place the instrument on his throat, and the patient bites upon his tongue so that saliva or mucus comes out from the mouth of it by the internal medicine, so that it does not come out of it because of any cause over the larynx of him, and prevents it.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And bring your hand to the medicine, and press it on his throat for an hour within which he is going to be blackened and numbed by the bite of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you want, take hold of him and wrap him around his neck, and submerge the hold in the medicine, and put the neck into a tube from above so that the hold adheres to that tube, and do it as many times as you get what you want from the cauterization of the uvula, and let it be those days or four.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you want to repeat the medicine, repeat it, and let the cauterization be cleaned in the circuit of the uvula with the wrapped hold in border, and wash it with water, and cure it from outside with ointment, and within with gargles within that it is healed.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	This kind of cure is more safe than incision and less feared.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Some are cured of the uvula with water which is more subtle than cauterization and incision, because it is cured with sub-smoking in this way: take calamus, hyssop, rosemary, sage, wild carrot, chamomile, bread, and like herbs, and combine all of them or some of them in a pan, and put vinegar into it, and boil; and the pan be well stirred with a spoon, and is placed in its place on the fire a loop, over which is placed an instrument of iron according to this way; it should be made of silver or iron.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And is put the end into the patient's mouth within that the smoke can get to the uvula over the loop, within that the uvula is going to be dimmed.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And repeat it on those spots within that are dry, and keep in mind that you do not make this cure at the coming of the apoplexy, because it would too much fit in the apoplexy, and do not make water, but declare the apoplexy from him caut.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	If you do not have this instrument with you, then take a cane and form the end of it a loop, so that the patient' mouth is closed, because the loop of the cow prevents the smoke from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	This cure is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter.xxxviii.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	Of extraction of thorns and of water which adheres in the larynx and of other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Spots on the larynx or thorn and any other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Then take out water which of those appears, and on which the sight falls, because you press the tongue to the instrument in front only, so that it is declared to you water which is in the larynx.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And water that does not appear to you in the larynx, then make the patient vomit before the food is digested in his stomach, because it fortifies the attached cause of the larynx is форогутый by vomiting; or if he swallows a stone of naphtha or of lettuce or a piece of dry bread; or take a sponge from the sea that is dry and hard, and rub it strongly to the tongue, and then make the patient swallow it, because when you put it into the place in which thorns are extracted, then forohutye.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And if you take a snake and rub it strongly to the tongue, and is placed within the table and under the bed, then is extracted; or if you take a pig and rub it strongly to the tongue, and is placed under the table and under the bed.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	If you do not fortify yourself with those causes which we have said, then use of an iron instrument according to this form:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And is larger than a nail and in the end of it is concavity which you put into his throat with ease.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And turn his head with his back to you, and keep in mind that the touch of his jaw on the larynx, so that it does not come up to him with food or water which is causing a sore throat, or that he eats it with his hand.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	But nevertheless that the patient puts it in is honey, because of its knowledge of the place of the attached cause and it pushes down, and brings his hand to the instrument in his hands, all according to the quantity which is prepared for him so that he does not fortify himself.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter.xxix.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	Of extraction of blood which is attached to the larynx.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When blood is treated with water which we have described in the division of the cure by medicine, and does not agree to you, then consider in the larynx of the patient towards the sun, because you have pressed the tongue to the instrument which we have said.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Then if you want the blood, extract it with a small needle or with delicate gestures properly.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not possible for you to extract it with that, then take a concave tube and put it into the larynx of the patient, and place in the concave part of the tube an iron hook, and make as many passes (within that the blood is dead and stops from the larynx) and abstain the patient all day from water.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	And bring a bottle full of sour water, and work the patient' mouth with it, and wash the patient' mouth with it; and does not drink any cause from that water and let him drink it an hour later or other with his hand, because blood soaks quickly when you taste it.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	If the blood is not fortified with water which we have said, then sub- fumigate the patient with cumin or with asafetida using the instrument which we have said in the sub-fumigation of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Take water, and make it in two parts.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And is another way of operation in sub-fumigation of it, that you take a wave in which are carbon ignites and the wave is covered with a cover in the middle of which there is a loop, and is formed in that loop the end of the instrument; and then remove it from it sub-fumigatio; and let the patient put his mouth on the end of the tube, and close his mouth so that the sub-fumigation does not fortify itself within that you know that the sub-fumigation reaches the blood, because the blood quickly feels.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if he does not taste, then repeat the sub-fumigation several times, and abstain the patient from drinking, and eat salty foods and dry fruits, and do not drink water, and so it is necessary that this regime is fortified.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the shape of the instrument which has blood-sucking tips when viewed; and it is similar to tweezers at times, except that it has some curves:
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	which is placed on the guolayro, and the extreme end of it resembles an owl's beak, which is sharpened with sandpaper, because when a certain cause occurs, it does not let go.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter .xl.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which is the summary of the surgery in regard to apoplexes and the section on them.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	The apoplexes are special motets, of various kinds, according to their memory, from each in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they are diverse in piercing and sectioning them by two methods; of which one is by the species of apoplexes in themselves; and by that which they acquire from moisture.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second method is proper to the places in which the body suffers, because the apoplex in the head is different from that in the buttocks; and an apoplexy in the flesh is different from that in a joint; and each of them has its operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And some apoplexes are such that they do not need to be pierced, but require proper maturation of the pus in them or completion of their course.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	And other apoplexes are such that they need to be broken when they are crossed; and do not mature according to their course, because the apoplexy, when it approaches a joint, prolongs the essence of it within until it breaks; and strong corruption occurs in the ligaments or nerves of that joint, causing contraction of the member; or it is an apoplexy next to a main member, and if you do not pierce it while it is not mature towards the main member; or it is next to the buttocks, then pierce what is not mature; and do not pierce the cru, from incomplete digestion, but pierce what is next to the buttocks, so that you do not reach the pre-on of it and elongate it toward the openings at the back of the buttocks, causing a fistula, or that it should be made on the edge of it and not heal.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	And you must know the time for piercing the apoplexy, and then it is when it has matured.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And you must know that it is mature when the pain abates and the fever ends, and there is a decrease in the pulse, and the tip of the apoplexy becomes sharp, and the other symptoms.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And because you know that piercing should be done in the pus-filled space behind the apoplexy, and that pus comes from the cure of the eminence.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And the piercing should be done at a distance from the long of the flesh or the body, if the apoplexes are in the openings of the main members or of the feet, and in the places of the ligaments, of the nerves, of the arcs; and finally, in all places that are hidden in the openings; because in those that reflect, use piercing according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	And when the apoplexy is in a carnous place, then do you more quickly that you pierce it within until its course is completed; because if you pierce it before its completion, it prolongs the essence of the pus within and adds to its thickness, and hardens its lips and profundity.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	And some apoplexes are pierced according to the thickness of the flesh or body; because necessity dictates, or because it is from that member.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And if you administer a small piercing, and in the great apoplexes a great piercing and a wide one or various sections according to the diversity of their size.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And other apoplexes are such that they should be cut and lanced when made; and if they are done in a place where the flesh is hardened and has a crust; and some of them, as those that occur in trots and nodules.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And of those that are not cut at all in the section have three angles; and of those that are lanced, as when it is done with a figure of an oak leaf, and of the apoplexes of the joints.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And of them are those in which round section is administered, and lunar-shaped; and resembling these.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	And he who has not a cap as those of his apoplexes, because you pierce him with piercing that is superficial, or flat only.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And when the apoplexy is large and has already collected some pus; pierce it then, and not with a coyer that draws all out of it at once; cut off one part from it on this day, and another on the other day, and make it shed more often according to the graduation until it is completely removed.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	And more importantly, if the patient is of a virile virtue, or female child, or small child, or old in decrepitude, because the animal spirit has its veins resolved to the exit of the pus, and strongly weakens the patient, and you open them.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Take great care with this chapter and apply your cauterization to those apoplexes; because you abstain from plagues, and consider how, if the apoplexy is small, or a flat section, then you administer the cauterization with a sharp edge or awl; but if the apoplexy is large, and the sections of piercing are thin, then you pause your cauterization in each place where they join together.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if in the apoplexy a part of the cord is cut away or concaved in its course, then you compress it with a sharp old or a string of linen, as when you have shaved or razored, remove moisture; and strengthen that within three days; and proceed with it and cure the pus that has come out within that which is to be saned.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	And if blood flows in the hour of your operation, then you administer warm water and vinegar and place a linen cloth on it, and pause it on the surface of the flow of blood that is seen.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	And if the flow of blood persists, then you administer the remedy and cure and powders which I have recommended in various places of this book and division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	And if it is in the wintertime, and the place of the apoplexy is a place of motley nerves, then you put powder of wine and oil of cauterization, and pause it on those places.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is in the summer, and the places are carnous, then you pause powder of wine and oil or wine and oil, and all of it be frayed within three days, as we have said; and then you remove the apoplexy and abstain from that and administer its cure according to what has been said.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And thus is the water that is necessary for the knowledge of the cure of apoplexes in general; and more specifically, according to the distinction already made, each apoplexy has its own method of cure, which we shall now consider separately.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter .xli.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	Of the section of apoplexes that occur in the top of the head.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the top of the head are small apoplexes, and they are of various kinds; some contain skin within them, and others of their own nature.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And of them are blisters, and those that contain moisture resembling lemon juice.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And those that contain moisture resembling milk, and others similar to it; and those that are bloody, hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those that do not fear it, you must make an extension of those that do; because the fire of the latter does not cause pain.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	E the operation in section of those is that you desire those am instrument the form of which see appropriately so, which is called entromes, until that you know that contain.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	If what counts is moisture, then cut it by section according to length through surface section according to this shape:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And start in the section of the line .B within the line .G. Then, when the moisture has been evacuated, then scrape that part for which that moisture is responsible, and do not leave from that any cause of all, because twelve watched returns, if remains from that any cause.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And approach dunking in Egyptian ointment, if it is present, and otherwise in water and salt; and fill that one with the solution and let that one rest for another day, because with water it corrodes all that is covered by that film.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And approach dunking in Egyptian ointment twice and three times if you need it, within that you are confident that there is no cause of that film; then heal the infection with ointment until it is cured.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if there is an abscess with greasy nodules, then you incise it according to this shape:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	in a section have shape of a club, and cut between two lips of the section and scrape that from all sides, and exert your strength in extracting the tunic which contains it.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	Or if your arm hurts you, then do so that I may tell you first.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And apparently do in the abscess with nodules of section and cure according to what you have said; and cut over an abscess with nodules is lighter, because it is little sore and little moist.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And some times so much of these abscesses that are in the head on some men whose whole is not moisture; this cause is because I incised over an abscess in the head of a young woman and pushed back the abscess like this with hard, sharp, white pain, which could not be pricked, and if at one was am that film, it would hurt that one.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	Or in other abscesses on the head this is not this chapter, because if the abscesses that come to the heads of children and their roots are on the ears, then all sections of these are surface sections.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And pause the hole of those from the beginning lower than their for so that it is eased the body part of the patient to the lower parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	Then return to cure those with water that suits them to the cure.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 32.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	Of section of scrofulas which happen in the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	These abscesses appear in the throat and in the lips and in the arms; and some appear in other body parts.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that happen in the throat, and all that are born between them, and all kind of scrofula are from their own tunic, and like this, with nodules and abscesses on the head, I have described before.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	The species of these scrofulas are nodules, because some of them are little hard, and those that contain moisture, and evil ones that I do not cure.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Then in that one which you recognize good disposition in the Touching, of which the color of water that is evident is appropriate to the color of grape, and is pleasant from the beginning, and is not attached to the nerves of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the pain, and is not pus, then cut it with surface section from the beginning of the body part of the line  .G to the line  .B, and scrape that from all sides, and extract it from two lips of the tunic in an ounce, or in a sharp ounces if you need them, like this I have said in the abscesses on the head.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is more careful that is not incised the vein or nerve.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And it is more careful that it does not have a sharp point, which is not suitable for you in the incising or that calms the patient, and cut water that is not necessary to incise; because if you incised a vein or arceria and prevent you from your operation, then pause in the plague with the three-pointed vinegar or other powders that stop the flow of blood, and start the plague, and let that one rest where there is pain due to the abscess, and be softened the plague and begins to rot.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the sore is incised.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Then return to your operation until it is completed.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And then ask the patient's own saying if there is any cause of other small scrofula, then incise those and clean those.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it is in the root of the scrofula a large vein, then return that you do not incise that scrofula from its root.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Until it returns that one with a strong fold and let that one rest within itself to prevent the disease.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	Then fill the infection with young ointment which you have already lowered in Egyptian ointment and then heal it.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you incise that scrofula whole, then return that you adjust two lips of the infection and cut it so much as there is no superfluity of fluid.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	Or if you think that there is an excess of fluid due to the size of the scrofula, then return that you do not incise the root of that one, and stretch it and administer sutures and water that is said.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And those scrofula that contain moisture, then pierce that one with a shallow hole here where it appears to you the place of maturation of the patient's head, and pause the piercing of those who are from the lower parts of the body.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	Then return to administer the piercing, little by little with ointment and similar to those, so that it corrodes water that is less than corrosion.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	Then when you recognize that the infection has been cleaned, then you heal it with ointment of meat generation within that is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 34.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	Of section of the abscess with nodules on the scalp.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	The little ones say this section in the headache, and I did not see any man in our town that he had done that.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of the sermon of those.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	Or in men who have an angle, then return that be avoided the extraction of the headache, as with water is not done quickly because all veins and major ones are here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	Or in those who have abscesses on the mouth or on two ears, when the disease is not in the can, then be careful with the section of the headache to avoid the loss that is caused by piercing.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Then when we want water, then cut the headache between three circles of the headache, or four with a small section for its width in that one is between two circles per quantity, so that the section is in the cartilage, and this place is suitable for section, because it lacks meat, and the patient' tools of blood are then.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor is a little bit, then return that extend the tunic of the scalp with an ounce, and approach to cut the tunic until it reaches the canal, and be careful not to harm the patient' tools of blood if there is any cause of them.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	Then return to incise the middle according to what we have described before; and it is significant on the section of the canal through the flame that it is from water that is its own, and by the separation of the voice.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And leave the poultice open for a while.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	When the hour comes when piercing is desired, add two pieces of cord to the poultice, and cut one alone from cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And then administer medicines that make the meat heal quickly so that it is healed.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And Albucasis says that the highest part of the sentence that we have mentioned, exposure, is only to see that some of these aphorisms have already turned the ring of the patient's throat, and the patient is coming to death, and the intestines are twisted, and some will cut the epiglottis so that the patient breathes on the spot of the poultice for a certain breathing, and is saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And by water I will order the poultice to be left open until the malice of the evil is consumed; and this malice lasts for three days; and then I will order the poultice in this way, and heal it until it is healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And where I have seen for my sake, it is that a servant takes a knife and cuts the ring in the patient' throat and inserts one part of the cane of the lung, and I was called to the cure of him, and another sound came then as the cry of the sick, and I discovered the poultice and removed the wound the size that was in the poultice small.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	And then you confessed that it had not cut a vein or anything, and the wind came out of the poultice, and healed it until it was healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And did not happen to the servant if he did not become ill in the mouth, and then some days returned to the improvement of his dispositions.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now I say that in the section of the epiglottis there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter xliv.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	Of section on aphorism that happens in the ring afterwards, and is called hernias from the ring.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This aphorism named hernia of the ring is a large one according to the color of the body, and it occurs in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it is second in two ways, either it is natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural one does not arise to heal.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental is second in two ways, the one is similar to nodos grasos, and the other aphorism that is made by nodulation of an artery, and in that there is fear.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And do not cover that you should make a presumption to him with iron unless in the small one.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you promise that and investigate that with the finger, and if it seems like a node of fat, and is not suspended on any of the veins, then you cut that one then with the knife, and extract that with water that contains the poultice and burciclum; and if not, then examine all his being, and then heal the place with water that contains cure within that is healed.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter xliv.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	Of section of the spices of nodes.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	The nodes have as many spices, and I have already said all the spices of them in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And that you should remember thus the difference between node and exiture with doubt.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	And you say that in exiture is a quality and fever and violent pains until the sweat of the superfluity ceases; and it is completed putrefaction when the hour stops the fever, pain, and heat.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	Perhaps at node is not a quality or fever or pain, and it contains that one with which it takes away the lion's life from itself.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And it is second in color of the body, and the beginning of it is with a chattering and does so with water, whether large or small, and it is second in two spices, either it is fat and contains moisture, and the colors of moisture are many, as I said in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	And then, when you approach the cure of node, promise that and investigate that with the instrument called intromissio, according to which it will come into its form in the chapter that is close to this.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And it is a way of inquiry of aphorisms and all nodes, and it is that you take this instrument and put it in the place where you think the aphorism has penetrated the ring.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And then finish your hand according to the measure of the size of the aphorism, and then extract the intromissio and consider that it is done in the trace of him.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the moisture is lost, whatever its color, then you cut it in a superficial section according to what I said in other aphorisms.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if there is no moisture in the trace of intromissio, then you know that it is fat.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And dry on it in a section without a form of crust according to this form:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	As I taught you, and suspend that one with the knuckles, and extract the skin from all parts with ease, and if you can, save that skin on the node.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	Perhaps if it is torn in the operation, it is not possible to extract that skin, and many eyes will see it, and then you extract it with ease within that it does not tear for any cause.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	For if it is torn of him by a little or much, the node returns according to the measure.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you think that of him by a little part is torn, then completely the poultice with some corrosive sharp powder and tighten the poultice, and place it over that one that has the aphorism, and heal that with another cure within that is healed.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if it is a large node, then you cut the two sides of him and heal that with water that contains curative.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	Perhaps if the pulse is pulsating towards him, or not-pulsating, then you cut and empty the place of three times that is corrosive and leave that dried up for two days or three within that it stops the pulse; and then return to cut that which is torn from the node.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter xliv.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	Of the shapes of the necessary instruments in section and piercing.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	The shapes are as many as the spices of intromissio, and the first is large, and the second is medium, and the third is small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The shape of intromissio large is this:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The shape of intromissio medium is this:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The shape of intromissio small is this:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	If it is a tool of iron, or of wood, or of the ends of a chisel with care, so that the instrument enters in the aphorisms.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are as many forms of experience, and they are not named differently, and one of them is called beri.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	The shapes are as many as the spices, which are large, medium, and small.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The shape of great experience, shape of him:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The shape of medium experience, shape of him:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The shape of small experience, shape of him:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	I say that they are in aphorisms and exiture and fistulas and bubos, so that among them are those of the bones and other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And so are round, large, and triangular, as many needles with which the threads are sewn together, and they are made of citrus wax, or of wax, or of iron, or of silver, And all the others are when they are made of iron wax.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And they are the experience of black plums, which agree that by them the fistulas are opened in the concavity of those who are reflected and reflected on their reflection.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And from three spices, because some of them are long and others short, and the other herbs according to the width of the fistula and the constriction of it.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	The shape of the experiment is large
Forma del experient migier de plom:	The medium-sized experiment is made of lead
Forma del experient petit de plom:	The small experiment is made of lead
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The shapes of the needles are made from different spices, because some of them are just long, and there are three kinds of spices: big, small and medium-sized.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And they are round, and they are made from three spices.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And some of them have two curves, and they are made from three spices.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And some of them have three curves, and they are also made from three spices.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	All of these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	The shape of a large simple needle, the shape of lead:
Forma de unci simple migier:	The shape of a medium simple needle:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	The shape of a small simple needle, the shape of lead:
Forma de unci orp gran:	The shape of a large round needle:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	The shape of a medium round needle, the shape of lead:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	The shape of a small round needle, the shape of lead:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	The shape of a large needle with two curves:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	The shape of a medium needle with two curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	The shape of a small needle with two curves:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	The shape of a large needle with three curves:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	The shape of a medium needle with three curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	The shape of a small needle with three curves:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the shapes of the scalpel that cut and scratch the nodes and abscesses, and they are made from three spices, because some are large, medium and small.
Forma de scapel gran:	The shape of a large scalpel:
Forma del scapel migier:	The shape of a medium scalpel:
Forma de scapel pauc:	The shape of a small scalpel:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The extremities of those that are sharp and the other extremities are not-sharp, and they are not stopped in such a way, but rather so that it is made with precision in the incisions of veins or nerves, and so that it is cured of the patient's disease and achieves tranquility through the application of the ointment, which also cures the abscess by applying it to it.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the shapes of the poultices, and they are made from three spices: large, medium and small, as you wish.
La forma de magda gran:	The shape of a large poultice:
Forma de magda migier:	The shape of a medium poultice:
Forma de magda pauc:	The shape of a small poultice:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	It is made from oil and seems like rain, it is made with alcohol.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And it is in the middle of the pointed tip and the hidden edge on the inside and outside, when you want it, so it can be used.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The shapes of the blades that are inserted between the fingers so as to pierce the abscesses and do not feel the pain, and they are made from three spices: large, medium and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the forms:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The shapes of the blades that cut through the flesh and separate it from the bone, and they are made from three spices: large, medium and small; the shape of lead:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	It is made from oil and seems like rain, it is round in shape and has a certain length, and it is subtle.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And these spices of blades should be large, medium and small so that through the cutting off of the flesh from the bone at a fast pace in necessity, and when it is your first time, it is not medicine.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	But you don't use those to separate the flesh from the bone all over the body, and do not use it except in the places of the skin, such as in the legs and thighs, in the breastbones, nipples, belly, and armpits, resembling their shape of the skin.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And some are made from those other instruments that are small and look like needles according to this shape; in which the flesh is separated when it is cut with phlebotomy, or incision of a vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And some are made from round blades according to this shape:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	Of the treatment of men's nipples that are assembled from women.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some are inflated by the humors of men who are prone to sleep while being covered with skin, and some are inflated, and some are assembled from women's nipples, and Roman apothomesias, hot.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you agree with this water, cut those that are cut by the lunar section according to this shape, from line B to line G, and then cure all the grossness, and then employ the plague of incurable medicine, and then sew the lips of the plague together, and heal those within that area.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	If the nipple sways to the left and is softened by its magnitude, then it is cut in two parts, each part containing a half of the shape of the moon, and each part is sewed together with a stitch, and the pain is relieved, and then administer water that has been prepared for the suturing and the powders that are necessary in the treatment, as long as it is healed.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not agree with the incision of water that has been cut due to the disturbance of the disease, and for the flow of blood, then cut it so that it is filled with the plague that is submerged in a corrosive vinegar, and then heal those within that area, as long as it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	The piercing of abscesses that comes from below the tongue.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	Those abscesses that come from below the tongue are of the same kind as the scrofulae and ulcers, which contain a pus that is drained.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And those are some that contain moisture; and those that contain water cut into the lunar section according to this figure: from line G to line B. And when all the water has been evacuated from the abscess of the disease, then you complete it with a cotton swab and leave the area for another day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And let the swab remain and be cured with a convenient ointment to water, as long as it is healed.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the abscess of the nodes is, and of the scrofulae, then you should cut it open, as long as there was a mention in the section about scrofulae that are caught.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	May if the plague is extended in an area that needs to be burned, then administer it according to what has been said before.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 50.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	The section of abscesses that occurs through an artery or vein.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an artery is broken, and the knot is hardened that is formed over it, which is a long-aggrevated mass in the neck of the patient; and when the abscess is relieved with sharp tools, you feel a striding sound.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And when it is through a vein, it is rounded on the surface of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And the cutting of this abscess is an error, and mostly in that which is left on the sides of the body, and in the armpits, and in the neck, and in many places of the body; and it is very large, so that its treatment with iron should be avoided, and what is in the extremities, or at the top, should be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	May he who is affected by inflammation of the orifice of the urethra be cut in the scrotum as long as possible and then separate the skin from the scrotum so that it can be freed from the tunic so that it is exposed.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And then place the needle and let it enter the other side, and secure the urethra with two knots, — which causes you to extract two urethras that are in the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	Then cut the place between the two ligaments with a knife so as not to injure the member completely while it is in the vessel, and let the apoplexy dissolve.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then administer a cure in which there is fire within so that the ligaments are burned, and then heal that with hot water within so that it is cured.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if it is an apoplexy caused by a vein cut, then cover that you have covered with your hand so as not to touch the apoplexy with the cord, and then insert the needle; and make a double thread inside so that you extract it from the other side, and secure the apoplexy with one ligament according to what I said to you in the ligament of the urethra of the two parts with the two extremities of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	May he who fears that the thread will be extracted, then insert the needle into the apoplexy before cutting the first thread, and secure the threads in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Then dry the apoplexy in its place within so that when it is wet with water, then cut the excess of the cord, and leave what is wet to dry.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then place on it the pillow that you have dipped in wine and oil, and then administer the cure that is made with cold water so that it is cured.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Capitol for the apoplexy that occurs by torsion of nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Thus the apoplexy in the urethra and in the vein, and similar apoplexies in the nerves when they occur by percussion or by excessive work, and by similitude.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And it is done by the most in the places of the helpers or of the tongue, or in any place where the joints are inflamed.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And it is a hard apoplexy, and it resembles the color of the other members, and it is in the upper ones by virtue of its position, and when it is strong with violence, it sends through the patient similar astonishment.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And it is not an apoplexy that is gathered on the front of the body, and therefore the cord remains, and it affects all parts of the body from the front, neither from the front nor from behind.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore of those that are in the joints do not cover that they are enfolded with iron, for it would be strong against them.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	May he who is in the head or in the forehead with the cord with a knife.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	May he who has a little apoplexy, then cut it off at its root.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is great, then hang it by a thread, and then cut it off, and then stop the flow of blood with sutura, and heal that within so that it is cured.
Capitol .li.	I have understood.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	Of a section of apoplexy that occurs from the mouth and occurs in the abdomen.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	Engrave the faces that are seen in the stomachs of those and in the other parts of the body from those same, which are called fungous by similarity to mushrooms, of which the root is thin and the top of the body is large; and also of those that are small, and of those that are magnified.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I have seen one, and in its stomach were two similar things that seemed to be mushrooms, and there was no difference between them, white ones, with fine roots.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And the lips of those were turned toward each other, and moisture flowed from that all the time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Then you cut off those and cut off the other one in half in the weight that is 30 pounds. and the other is 30 pounds.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And the operation of cutting them is that you consider whether he who has it is wet, and the color of those is white, wet, with fine roots; then cut them with a knife on the side, and be in the presence of fire, for what is seen from them when they are cut is driven out by three times; and if you cut off one of them, cauterize that.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if the patient is a little bit frightened and worried, do not cut him with iron; but then take fresh lead, and string that on which has been described; and leave that for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	Then adjust the string of the lead so that it is not too tight, and then do not tighten the large lead within so that it is cut and falls by itself.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	May he who has a thick root be cut within so that there is no cause for fear and worry, and more in the one that is in the abdomen.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	It is possible that you cut off half of it, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	Then heal that within so that the plague is healed.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And be careful not to cut off a part of the body that has a dark color, and little feeling, and looks with suspicion, because that is cancerous.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And I came back to the memory of the cancer.
Capitol .lii.	I have understood.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	Of a cure of excellence around the navel.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	Eminence of the navel is caused by various things; or by fissures of the navel that are on the abdomen, and let the intestines or intestines flow according to whether they are inside or outside; or by the blood that flows from a vein or an artery according to whether it comes from the front or from behind; or by constriction of wind in it.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	May he who is caused by a fissure of the navel and the intestines flow from it, then the color of the apoplexy resembles the color of the body, and there are three pains, and then it appears in different places.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it is by the escape of the intestines, then the place of that with you, of which we have spoken, in a more violent difference, and when you press that with your hand, it returns; and there is a lot of violence to the right side, and it is very strong.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	May he who is caused by moisture, then it is strong and does not hide when you press it with your hand, neither is it forced, nor is it hidden.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it is by blood, then these signs are given of the apoplexy in black color declining.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	May he who is caused by flesh, then it is a hard and thick apoplexy, and it remains according to a certain quantity.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	May he who is caused by wind, then the touch of that is strong.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation of that is that you consider if the eminence of the navel is caused by blood from an artery or vein, or wind; then cover that you forbid the cure of it, because in that is fear and worry when you are taught about the apoplexies in the chapter where I said about apoplexies caused by an artery and a vein.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the eminence of the navel is caused by intestines or tissues, then order that you command the patient to have his back up, and then send a tent in the entire navel, and then order it to stay upright between your two hands, and then extend a thread strongly into the navel in the same circle as the navel above the place where you sent it to the tent; and then cut off half of the apoplexy to the parts with a large knife; and then hold it in the other hand, and then cut in the circuit with a strong thread or a thistle, and do so in the way that is pleasant.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And then divide the appendix with your fingers and insert the needle into it, and if you cannot grasp it by the ligament, then pull it out with tweezers and push it towards the internal parts of the belly.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have torn the hernia, then tie a knot in it; and cut off the excess.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	Mayst if it is contrary to your tendon or vein, then surround that point, and return to your operation; and take two needles and fit them very firmly into those two threads, in a manner of cross, the points which pass through; and then tighten the appendix tightly around the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you wish, remove the needles and let that point stay inside so that it can fall on its own; or cut off that part when it has thinned out and then clean it up, and then care for that wound which is covered with water inside so that it may heal.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the prominence of the navel is made of no meat or only of moisture, then cover what you have cut off with this ointment and destroy the flesh or the moisture, which you have torn out, and then care for that wound where the moisture is located so that it may be strengthened.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter II.
De curacio de cranc.	Of the Treatment of Bone Fractures.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	I have said, in the division, of the kinds of fractures and in what way they are treated with medicines, and that it is helpful in their treatment to reduce them by force so that they are not ulcerated; and I have said that a fracture generated during pregnancy requires great care in its treatment.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And they said that some fractures are located in places where it is possible to eradicate them completely, as when the fracture is in the breast or in the groin and similar members are removed from there, and especially when it is only beginning.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	But when it is old and hard, do not cover it up, for the eye cannot heal such flesh nor have I ever seen such a thing, nor that it has come to water.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation in it is that you go before and take off the patient and purge him of black cholera, and then clean it up, if it has been torn open.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And then prepare the patient for the operation with the preparation in which that part is located, and then cut off the nails of the foot with a pointed instrument, and then push back all parts with a cotton wadding so that it does not cause any trouble to the roots of the hair.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And let the wound run, and do not wash away that filthiness, and squeeze out the fluid, and cleanse it with your hand or with an instrument which you have at hand.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if you have made the wound run with a large cut of a vein or artery, then cauterize that within which the flow of blood has stopped, and then care for that with the other treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .liv.	Chapter IV.
De curacio de ydropici.	Of the Treatment of Hydropesis.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already mentioned, in the division, of the kinds of hydropesis of water, and of the characteristics of each kind, in the treatment of it with medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And that which is cured by force is only the kind of algorism, and it does not approach the kind of tympanist or the kind of hyposarcoma, since water is deadly.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have already treated this kind of hydropesis with medicines, and do not take your medicine, then be sure that it is not given to a person who has already overcome the illness, or who has another kind of hydropesis similar to that of cough or stomachache, and in such cases do not give it to them with force, for fear is there about water.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	But if you see the patient's virtue as abundant, and that there is no other illness in him but hydropesis alone, nor an infant or an old man, then the way of operating with him is this: you raise the patient between your hands, and the servant holds his leg up, pressing the water out of the foot, and then takes a stream of water according to this form:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	it should be of two sharp ends long, of the sharp extremity also with a stream; but nonetheless it should be in a short length little by little, so that in the operation on him not pass into the budel, and that all of them.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And then consider if the generation of hydropesis is from within the budel, since when you cut off three fingers at a time on either side of the navel, in the middle of the foot over the heel bone.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	But if the generation of hydropesis is due to a disease of the foot, then your section should be on the left side of the navel for three fingers.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the generation of it is by its own nature, then your section should be on the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	Do not cover that your section is on the rib on which you want to operate on the patient so that the excess does not run to that place.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And then pierce the instrument completely through it, and then insert it into that section, and raise your hand to the stream between the cup and the foot, and you squeeze it out; and if the quantity is of a thumb or more.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And then pierce the cup so that the stream goes to the desired place, and it is a place of water.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then remove it and insert an instrument which has this form:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	it is shaped like a thin silver tube; it is made of silver or copper or lead, and at the end has a small hole, and on either side two holes, one above and one below; and its extremity is sharpened according to the form of a feather, so that sometimes:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	At the end of it is an upright ring, since when the instrument touches water, then that so often as half a measure is discharged from it, for if you discharge less than that, very hard does the patient endure by reason of the resolution of his spirit, or comes to him five times near death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	But discharge that so often as the virtue of it requires, and second, according to what you are disposing of in the virtue of his pulse and the goodness of his life.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And then remove the instrument, and retain the water which is produced, since it is so often as it is retained by the rib which retains the hole that is on the cup from which it is produced, which you have described to me that you perform according to that manner.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And then repeat the instrument on another day if the patient tolerates water, and discharge a small quantity of water, and let it run over a little time for fear, and do not err so that it does not run off from the water but a little.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	But if you are afraid of the patient, then let a large quantity of water run, then bury him in sand, and bathe it with sweat, and wait for a long time; and care for him with drying medicines until he is healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And then cauterize on the stomach, and the foot is pulled back from the water, according to what I have said in it that has been mentioned.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter V.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	Of the Treatment of Children Whom the Bladder Does Not Puncture.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Some of the children are born from the womb of their mother, and the head of their mixture is not pierced (or it is straight or is not in its place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Then place him on his back so that he can be brought to birth easily by this method according to this form:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	Then put a small lead nail on it and tie it up, and you will do so for three days or three times.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when he wants to urinate, let him go and urinate, and return again.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	If you do not hold the lead nail, the urine that goes over the place may not leave this closure.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	The one from which he was cut should be treated with a lead nail, as we said before, for three days or until it is enlarged.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	The ones from which he was not cut are left untreated, and the cause is because of these, that man who was born with the birth mark should lift his hand to his chest; and this is not done, for semen cannot reach the mother according to its natural course, and it becomes a disease.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	And the way of the operation on him is that the patient be placed on his back, and the head of the penis is extended from the patient's right side with a violent extraction, and the top of the penis at the place of the perineum is cut with a sharp knife, or so that you do not shave any part, in order that the foreskin of him comes out resembling the head of the penis, and that the birth mark falls into its place according to how it is covered.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And be careful that in your operation of a cut wound, because it is likely to happen that the blood flows out; and stop him from bleeding by applying pressure until he is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter LVI.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	Of the birthmark that happens in the foreskin on the head of the penis and of the corruption, darkness, and adhesion of the foreskin on the head of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	These birthmarks may occur on the penis and are bumps of flesh.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And one is evil, and the other is not.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	Not evil, but cut it off with a very small knife and let it fall away; then apply the oil of Egypt to that spot, and there is no need to use any other medicine; heal with this.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the birthmark is evil, of a white color, then cut it off; but, if it is of a dark color, then apply heat to the incision and rub it.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	If the birthmark is in the foreskin on the head of the penis, and one part is inside the foreskin and the other part is outside, then cut off the one that is outside; but if you want to keep that one, which is inside at first, until it is hardened, then heal the one that is outside, because when you heal that one, it is not certain that it will not be torn.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And these things also happen in the genitals and in the foreskin that becomes dark and corrupts; then cut off all of it that is already corrupted and turning black, or that has already become corrupted; and apply to that oil made from a piece of bread with three eggshells ground up and mixed into it.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And heal that other one with any other medicine until it is healed.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	If there is bleeding from the wound, then apply lunar heat according to this form:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	Because two types of heat are useful, one for treating bleeding and the other for treating corruption when it has become corrupted.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the penis is torn and completely destroyed in an hour, then insert a lead pipe into the meat of the foreskin with a hole made through it so that the urine passes through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adhesion does not happen except in that which has the foreskin, and from it the head of the penis is completely separated), cut off with a sharp knife until it is dissolved and the head of the penis is completely freed.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to cut those accurately, then cut off with a sharp knife any cause on the head of the penis and on the foreskin, and when it is very small, it is easily pierced by the sharp edge of the skin.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And separate between the foreskin and the head of the penis with a lead thread that is very thin; it will easily slide into the water and not adhere to anything else.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And heal it with vi stiptic until it has hardened.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter LVII.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	Of the cleansing of children and of the treatment of urine that happens to those who are circumcised.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not the solution for continence except with other medicines; but because it is part of our operation and our will, and because that one is especially suitable for children, we must assign this best operation and make it lighter so that it may lead to salvation.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	So I say that the children do not say circumcision in some of the free nations, because they do not observe it in their laws, and this is only because we have acquired by experiment that this causes many craftsmen and barbers to practice circumcision and purification with a knife and a scalpel; and they use a thread with a hook and incise with a needle.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	I have seen all of these ways and I do not find any better purification with scissors, with a thread that is used in purification with a needle, because the thread that is tied around the foreskin has two ends, and the loop that comes from it falls away; and the thread that is tied around the foreskin becomes tight around it, and this causes pain unless it is cut.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And the purification that is done by an apprentice, which is manual, and of which barbers make use, is not secure for the cutting of the extremities of the male member, because it goes into the hole very easily.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	But in the operation with a scalpel, one can easily damage and corrupt your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the loop of a child is short by nature, and such that there is no need for purification, and I have seen it.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	More of the purification that is done with scissors and a thread than by cutting it with a sharp knife, for when the sharpness of the knife goes away, it is so because it goes into the hole, and therefore you should make a comparison in time; and this causes a compression of the string around the head of the penis completely, and this is where the loop does not come out; and this is how you do a cut that makes no mistake.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the first method of operation is that you should stay with the child while it is still young, and if it is small, do not cut the string from the head of the penis until the next day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And then place him on his back in that way, which is most likely for him to accept intelligence.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And then place him on his back with the head supported and not leaning; and hide the scissors in your hand or leave them somewhere where the child does not see them and nobody else sees them.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	Then put your hand on the head of the penis and blow into the loop, and pull it until it is stretched; then purify that which has been attached to it by impurity.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	Then turn the loop of thread twice around your hand, and then tie it tightly with another string; then place it on top of the first string, and secure it well, and then cut between those two strings.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then raise the cord by means of a lever and remove the head of the hammer; and then leave it to cool slowly, because it is better so; and sprinkle dust over it and on top of the dust put cloth in which molasses was mixed with a little olive oil that has been recently roasted; and then leave it like this for another day; and care for that with cure until it is healed.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The shape of the forceps for dissection, this is the shape:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	If the extremities are not sharp and the others are, so that the claw of the hand does not pass through it; and if the length of the two is equal to the length of two fingers joined together.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	The mistake in dissection is that if you pull too much of the internal cord, all of it will come out; or, if you only cut part of it, then you should make the incision.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Then, when you have extended that to your finger tip at the joint of the hand in front of the opening; and then cut it according to the second equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold that to your finger tip; then remove it with a blade and cut it.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	If they have passed three days, and it remains swollen; then leave the hammer in place; but cut off that with ease, and cut it according to the second preparation.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And keep away from the head of the hammer, for it will not be suitable for him.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	Then care for that with water which solidifies the powders we have mentioned in the treatise on the powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it has been cut too much; and you follow the incisions made by someone else; then it will not be suitable for him.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	Then care for that with water which we said would heal.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter LVIII.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	On the Treatment of Urine Retained in the Bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by wind due to a cold or by heat; or by poison or meat; and similar to those which we have mentioned in the division on treatments for the disease.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not dissolved, and it has remained in the bladder because of a cold; then make the patient sit with his legs bent.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	Then place the feet of the patient on his two legs; and extend his abdomen by pushing down from above his two legs; and tighten the bandage around him as much as possible.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Then, when the neck of the bladder is tightened; then the passage behind will be opened up, so that the urine will be voided.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	If the urine is not dissolved by water which we have mentioned; then make an extraction from him with an instrument called a syringe, of which this is the shape: It should be made of silver and fine leather, such as a leather tube with a long pipe at its end, similar to a palm tree in shape; and the pipe should be fine in thickness at its tip.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the way of extracting the urine from him is that you should double the bag and fasten it on the edge of the tube by a good knot; then introduce the end of the tube into the opening of the bladder, and cut with scissors if there is any excess of the leather; and then insert it into the urethra with force.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	Then make the patient lie down on his back; and immerse the bladder in water, and oil of olive and vinegar.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	Then insert the tube with ease up to the root of the bladder; and then double the tube over at its end; and then introduce it into that which will go up to the bladder, and that should be done in the order mentioned above, except for meat which goes against the flow.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	Then let the bag fall slowly from the leather; because urine cuts the leather short.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Then extract that and treat with urine; and use a syringe, not making it too full so as to cause pain; but relieve the bladder with a syringe, and then make the patient comfortable.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter LIX.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	On the Quality of Bladder-washing with a Cliff-bed and Similar Instruments.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the bladder becomes infected or develops an ulcer; or is cut by a sharp object, and you want to distil water and medicines in it; then use an instrument called a cliff-bed, which has this shape:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	it should be solid at its end, so that it is closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in it three holes: two from the first hole; and then three times.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	In the beginning it is a round shape, in which it is said that water is trapped; and according to its quantity, add what is needed for it; but when any cause causes it to expel moisture, let it be expelled with water; and when it is expelled far away, according to the quality of the cliff-bed, which is painted with tar in the battles at sea.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	Then, when you want to add moisture to the bladder; introduce the end of the cliff-bed into the moisture, and throw water at it which is thrown up by it; because the moisture is thrown into the concave part of the cliff-bed.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	Then introduce the end of the cliff-bed into the tube according to what we have mentioned in the syringe; and then add moisture with water which will be thrown up by it; because that moisture will reach the bladder as much as possible, and the urine will be passed out with it.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The shape of the delicate instrument for bladdery is like this:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	It should be made of silver or leather, the tip being rounded or similar to a small feather; and the tube should be fine in thickness inside.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	Then make the bladder move; and add to it the moisture you want to crystallize in the bladder; and then introduce that into a double bag with a tight knot; and heat that humidity over fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	Then introduce the end of the tinhter into the tube.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	Then press your hand on your back with the moisture over the bladder; and that should be done so that the urine is passed out with it.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	If you do not have a bladder, then make a circle of rope; and pierce it all around; and then introduce the double bag into those holes, so that it is twisted and tied; and then add to it the moisture with which you want to treat; and then pour oil and water.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	Then you should tie that up with the instrument; and make it in such a way as to fit the bladder, and express it so that the moisture reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Chapter LVI.
De extraccio de peyra.	On the Extraction of Urine.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already mentioned in the division on urinary disorders and treatments with medicines, and the difference between urine produced in the lungs and that produced in the bladder, and the signs of the latter.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	We have mentioned urine which is produced by a catarrh; and also that which is produced by an operation.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	Urine produced in the bladder itself is that which is retained in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	There are four kinds of urine: that which is kept in the bladder, that which is produced by a catarrh and is not retained; that which is produced by an operation; and that which is produced by a fever.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Then say that urine produced in the bladder is mostly in children; and of its signs is that the urine passed from the bladder is similar to water in its subtlety, and appears like sand; and the patient's bowels move with a noise like that made by a horse's hoove; and then it appears as if there were drops of blood in it.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And it takes a long time for children who have had this disease to be cured, and difficult cure in the old.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	But in young people is partly cured by water because it is among them.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And of that for which the pain is greater and the cure is slower; And if it is little, it is contrary to that.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore, as we approach the cure of that, let us begin with the preparation mentioned above for the treatment of the disease; because that injury prevents some wounds from being infected by the disease through inspection.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	Then return the hernia to the patient's feet and press it and wrap it well so that the pain does not go down to the groin of the bladder, or jump from place to place.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	Then make a cut between them well prepared, and the cushions of the patient are left there, so that the whole bladder is lowered to the area where the hernia was removed.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	Then return it all there.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	Therefore, if you feel the pain in that area, then immediately lie down on your back with a cut above it.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if it does not come out all at once, then when you have well anointed that place with oil and the finger is slightly heated, if the hernia is in a child, or half-grown, and the finger is well heated, insert it into the patient'c anus.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	Then prepare that pain inside which is behind the finger.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And slowly turn that small one little by little into the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	Then press it with your finger and force it out from the area where you made the cut.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And order the minister to press the bladder with his hand; and order another minister, on his right hand, to spread the thighs at the sides, and on his left hand to stretch the cord that is behind the bladder, in the area where you have made the cut.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Then return to the first preparation, with which this form is made:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	and cut it in two with that finger which is between the buttocks and the genitals, not in the middle, moving towards the left of the cushion; and make a transverse cut on that pain, so that the cut outside is wide and narrow inside according to the quantity of pain that comes out there, and no more, because by pressing the finger which is in the anus the pain is relieved, and it is a painful injury.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And know that there is no pain for which the relief of pressing is not difficult with water.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And that water is like a lion with small eyes, and it is round, and its relief is somewhat difficult.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	Therefore, if that is the one which has angles and margins, adjust in the split.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not so easy to relieve with a finger, then when you press it or stretch it gently on that place, where the extremity of it reaches, slightly and carefully, so as not to let go; or insert from behind an instrument with a curved tip.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	But if you cannot do it with your finger, then make a small cut on it, and if you see blood flow, press it with vinegar that is slightly heated.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	But if the pain is greater than one, at first press your hand to the opening of the bladder, and cut it slightly; and then press a little water; and seemingly, if there are more than two drops,
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if there is great pain, at first cut it with a large section, because it happens to the patient that two things cause it: or because it is old, or because it has received continued urine, for that place is not completely solid.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	But administer to it outside what is inside, or insert into it the instrument that breaks it from within, taking out that part in pieces.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Therefore, when you have finished your work, then fill the wound with water from an aloe plant and from dragon's blood, and strengthen it.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	Then put a linen cloth on the wound with oil of roses and some water to be rubbed together, or rose oil and salt water, so that the blister is broken by itself.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	Then return the patient to his seat, and do not remove the bandage for three days.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when that wound is cleaned with water and some oil, then treat it with the medicines Diafinicon and Dibazic for three days, as well as with a solution of salt water.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	But if the blister is broken with cauterization, and it looks like the pain is in the bladder, and it causes urine to be lost (and it is recognized by the exit of the pain from the bladder), then insert the finger into the wound and force out that pain, because if it remains, it will cause the bladder to corrode and putrefaction.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then wash the wound with salt water, water and oil, and opposite to all kinds of medicine, with water that brings out the cure from within.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	Then during the hours of all the cures you have mentioned, return both cushions and adjust the medicines that were placed on the area.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the pain is small and it is in the middle of the penis, and it is stuck there, and urine loss is prohibited, then cure that with water which I will now describe to you before the cut is made, because three times this treatment has prevented a cut; and already water is used, and it is to be hoped that if you have a piercer with iron, of which this is the form:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	of a triangular tip, taken in hand, held between the thumb and index finger, placed at the end, firmly gripped between the thumb and index finger,
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	Then firmly hold it with your hand and place it against that part so that it does not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	Then insert the iron into the penis, piercing with ease at the point where the piercer enters that pain.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	Then return the piercer to your hand in that small pain, and you pierce it from the other side with ease, because urine is sometimes absolute.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	Then press your hand on that part which is outside the end of the penis, because it is curved, and it is a painful injury, and the patient is healed.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	But if this treatment does not suit you for some reason that prevents it from being used, then hold between your hand and the penis a piece of string slightly longer than the length of the penis, and hold between the other hand the opposite end of the string.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	Then cut that pain on the penis between the two strings.
E aprop extratz aquela.	Then remove it.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	Then unbandage and clean up the wound.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	It is not necessary to hold it between the fingers, but rather so that it does not return to the bladder, and the other bandage above, because when the string is loosened, the pain goes away, but the cord returns to its place and hurts.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And it is necessary that you hold the string above, so that you raise the cord to the sides, or return to its place as it did before, and hurt the wound in that way.
Capitol .lxi.	Capital.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	Of woman's pain.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Pain in women is rare.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	But if you have any of that pain, then the cure is difficult, and it is prohibited by many methods.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of them is that the woman was very heavy.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second is because you do not find a good woman who can expose herself in front of doctors when she is pregnant, or is a married woman.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third is because you do not know this art well, mainly the operation of the hand.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth is that the location of the section according to the pain in women is far from the location of the pain, so it causes great pain and fear.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	And if necessity forces you to do this, then know that you take a good woman, and she is hidden.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	And if you are deprived of that, then know that you take a subtle and clever woman, or present an elderly woman well-versed in the craft of midwifery, or a woman who has mastered this art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Therefore make her present, and order her to do everything you will send her to do, from the inquiry about the pain to the beginning; which is that she guards herself well, for if she does not hide her desire in her heart, she may be caught by the pain.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Therefore, if you make her present, hide her from him, and then order her to write on herself.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	And if she is not pregnant, then order the midwife to put her hand on the cavity of the illness and feel for the pain, because she places her left hand over the bladder, and feels for the woman with good care.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	And if you make her present, then know that she kindly hides herself from the orifice of the bladder at the beginning of her labor, until she reaches the opening of the vagina.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And then she writes on herself the position of the head of the uterus at the opening of the vagina, and feels for the pain in that position, and her hand does not leave the woman's leg.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the section should be little at first; and then she puts her hand on that section, and if she feels the pain, then adjust the section according to the quantity, for which I know that the pain will move away from her.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And you should know that the signs of pain are many: some are small and sharp, and some are long and round, and there are spikes.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Therefore, you should know how many species of water there are for the purpose that you want to make on this water.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you want to stop the bleeding, then adjust in the virulent area three times and let her go for an hour until it stops, and then return to your operation before the pain disappears.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And make sure you prepare the instruments that he says in the extraction of pain in men, so that you are helped by them in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you want to stop the bleeding, and you know that the expulsion of blood is from the uterus that is placed, then put a powder on the area and stir it with a sharp instrument, and do not repeat this water; and leave the pain, and do not extract the blood, for a strong woman will die.
E aprop cura la plagua.	Then heal the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	Therefore, when the pain of labor begins to ease, then the location changes, and you return to your operation before the pain disappears.
Capitol lxii.	I have completed 62.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	Of section on hernia.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	Hernia is nothing but an addition of moisture in the white skin, which leaves the string of the genitals containing the blood, and it is called cyphac.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And some are in the proper skin, which nature prepares at the beginning of the birth, until it is separated from the other one, and it is the string of the genitals between the white skin that we have mentioned, and it is not water but tar.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is because of the injury that happens to the genitals, so that this substance is infused into them, and sometimes it happens due to impact made on the genitals.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this moisture has no color, for its color is turning to yellow or red, or it is black and fermenting, or it is white and watery, and it is water that is more.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which this addition of water is recognized are these: for if it is in the white skin that we have mentioned, then the swelling is round, a little turning towards the length, so as to form the figure of a cow, and appears the genitals, because the moisture contains all parts.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the moisture is in the proper skin, then the swelling is round at the beginning of the birth, and thus one judges that it is another cow.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the moisture is between the string of the genitals and the white skin, then he feels the pulse.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And if you want to know the color of the moisture in the swelling by its edge, then examine the shape of the swelling at the beginning of the edge; and according to the water that oozes out of it, judge from that what is inside.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	Therefore, when we come to heal you with this medicine, let us first order the servant to bring a warm cloth for your feet; then we will cut off his clothes.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	Then let him lie down on his back for a little while, and place some warm sheets over him.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	Then let him sit on the left side of you, and order the minister to follow with his right hand, which extends his arm to one of the two sides at the string of the genitals and at the beginning of the miracle of the belly.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	Then take a knife and cut the string of the genitals from one side to the other at their length, within the fifth inch.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	Then the section should be made according to the rule of distance from the line that you wish to make on the skin of the genitals, until it reaches the cyphac.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	Then remove it, and observe, and remember for such a thing that you do not cut it; and your removal is made in such a way that it is suspended on the birth of another cow, and carefully examine your removal according to the quantity that you can make.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	Then pierce the cyphac completely with water through a large hole, and remove all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	Then separate the two lips of the section by one finger, and extend the cyphac to its edge; and do not touch the string of the genitals together, and cut the cyphac in that manner, as you can make it.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	Then cut it into pieces of equal size, and especially the middle part, for if you do not scrutinize carefully the cutting of him, the water will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	And if you send him away from the string of his genitals in the hour of your operation, then when you have completed the section of the cyphac, return to him, and then adjust the two lips of the string of the genitals with a stitch, and then heal that one along with the other wounds, until it is healed.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you find that the cow is corrupted by another illness, then know that you destroy the vessels that are attached to the suspension, and remove him from there, and then heal him with water that we have mentioned.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	And if the water is added in two parts, then know that there are two hernias; therefore cut that part according to how you have cut the other one; and if it appears to you that it is an operation, then do it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	E appropriately you abstain from the drink, and enter into the sections of the lamb immersed in oil or in rose oil; and place before another piece of cloth that you have immersed in wine and oil, and spread it over two genitals and the wonder of the belly; and remove open folded cloths and powders, and lie those open.
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	And appropriately two cloths are pressed and are humped with wool according to this appearance; and the extremities are rubbed by a pad or wet wool, and are attached to the stretch of the breeches of the breeches, and the one of the extremities takes hold of the buttocks from behind the two, and the second takes hold at the split of the pantyhose, and the two extremities on the two genitals and two other extremities on the two chaps, and all the stretch is adjusted in the breeches of the breeches.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And some used to treat this hernia artificially by surgery in place of surgery with scissors; and it is because you take a sharp knife cauterization and burn it on that thread of the genitals, and is lit according to what we have mentioned within that is discovered the white capsule containing the water, and then you do cauterization according to this form:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	and it is assembled in Greek letters.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And appropriately pierces that capsule, and is lit within that all the moisture be expelled.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	And appropriately extends the capsule with nails, and scrapes it with nails, and scorches it with sharp cauterization; and scrape that according to what is possible within you so that you eradicate all of it; and guard yourself from the fire that the heat does not touch you.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And you know that this operation is more safe and more distant from the flow of drink, and better than an operation by surgery.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	May if at you causes opposition to the flow of drink in the hour of surgery or in the hour of cauterization, or the flow of drink, then cover that you cure what opposition does to you by water, with treatment which is said.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	May if the patient is a bit nervous and does not expect the second operation for its horror, then administer the piercing according to what I have mentioned above water; and it is when it is confirmed that you, by water that we have spoken of, that this hernia is watery.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	And then cover that you make the patient lie on a high shelf, appropriately pierces the apoplexy in the lower part of it with a blade, and place the piercing according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And be the wide opening within that runs all the water.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	And appropriately places on the area pad and lays it, so that runs the water.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And appropriately cures that within that the plague is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	May if opposition is to the flow of water in that hour you pierce: and water is not made except by water which the white capsule in the orifice of the plague causes opposition and prevents the ingress of water, then cover that you insert into the plague with a sharp instrument through which the water is drawn from the water droplets, the form of which is preceded; or adjust in the constriction of the plague a small one.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And you know that water returns, and is gathered appropriately after several months or years; and when it is added, then pierce according to that method of manual treatment, for the patient will pass its days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter LXXXIII.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	Of Surgery on Inflamed Hernia and the Treatment of It.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	You know that in surgery on this hernia is a lost fear of becoming worse in the worst dispositions; but to me it is seen the dismissal of it and being saved by it, for that one is better.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	I remember the operation on that and the spices of apoplexes.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, I say that the apoplexies are born in the bodies of those whose genitals are joined together and it is made by droplet causes: or because of acute excess of urine which is discharged from the genitals, or because of impact.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And it is the color of the apoplexies according to the color of the body, and does not change in pain, and is a heavy apoplexy.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And a heavy apoplexy is clotted, whose color is dark, and it does not feel to the touch.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And some are made by the nodulation of the arteries, and by the swelling of those so that it is already perceived the recurrence of it, or because of the swelling of veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	May that water is caused by the swelling of arteries is known by the dispersion of the apoplexy when you press it with your fingers, and does not cover that you touch it.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	May that which is made by the swelling of a vein is not dispersed by it any cause due to pressure with your fingers.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that on this species be made surgery and on the other meats; and it is because you scrape the thread of the genitals, and appropriately are brought the fire to the splits of it, and pull apart those of the vessels, and tie them together, and scrape them together as much as you can.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Therefore, if the water is already united with those meats, then cover that you remove the water and scrape that.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is adherence within any cause of the capsule, or between water that is between the veins, then cover that you release all that adherence and scrape that by round incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	May if it is a birth of meat in the place of the adherence that is behind, then cover that you scrape all that is from it, and pull out the water as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when your operation is completed, then fill the plague with infused wool in rose oil and wine; and appropriately cures that by the other treatment within that it is healed.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter LXIV.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	Of Treatment of Hernia That is of the Virgin.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	It has an apoplexies wrapped in a wrapper that resembles the softening of the testes, and it is difficult to make exercise or walk on the patient's back.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the treatment of this malady is by fear because of water from which the recollection of it precedes.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, cover that I say surgery on that according to that it makes manual treatment first.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And I say that you make the patient lie on a high shelf; and appropriately bring the suspending strings of the testes to their splits; and appropriately pull together the thread of the genitals with your fingers, with the bayssels that are joined to the pole; and have other servants who do so quickly.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And appropriately scrape with a blade that is made by transverse section in the right of the vessels within that the vessels are discovered.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And appropriately scrapes from all part as much as you have said by the dispersion of arterial tissue, which is in the veins.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And appropriately puts in those a needle in which there is double thread, and ties that at the first place of where it happens vit; and ties that another, seen from the back.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And appropriately scrape those at the middle place by right section according to the length of the body, and pull out that which is added to the noxious and corrupted fluids.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And appropriately cures the plague by treatment of other plagues that you wish to be born so that they fall those vessels that burn between the two genitals, for it is not bad because of water.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	May if it happens vit to all the bayssels, then cover that the testes are pulled out or that the testes by water are separated from the vessels, for it is deprived of all nutrition because of the cutting of the vessels, and they become withered, or that it does not grow well on them.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter .lix.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	On the treatment of hernias of the intestine.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The arrival of this hernia is by section which ends up being extended over the abdomen from the cut of the midriff, so that by dividing the intestinal loops from that rupture you place some of them.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture is either of the midriff or of excision from it, and such things happen for different reasons: either by percussion, or by noise, or by a cry, or by an unusual elevation for some heavy cause, or by similitude.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	And the sign of this, when it is by extension from the midriff, is that it happens little by little in a long time, and does not happen suddenly, and it is an abscess inside the hernia which compresses the intestine.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the sign of it is when it is by section from the midriff, for at the beginning it causes intense pain suddenly; and it is an abscess different in appearance near the navel, and there is an odd sound from the intestine, and the skin rubs against the openings of the hernia.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And some are forgotten about by the intestine, and it is called this hernia of the intestine.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And some are made to swell, and some run in the intestinal loop, and here it is held back, and it causes great and severe pain of the patient's foot, and sometimes it leads to bad pain and more so when it is pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the treatment of these diseases of the intestine, be careful that the cure should not occur in that area.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And the way to operate on it is that you order the patient to return the intestine to its cavity if you obey his return, and place a cushion between them at the opening of the hernia. And place your hand over their chest, and raise their legs.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And then tighten the rope which holds the testicles at their openings, and cut the rope long. And then place it between two blades according to how you want to make the section wider for them.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if the section according to the quantity that is possible that from it has been forgotten about.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And then cut off that hernia with the rope which holds the testicles at their openings, within each opening of the midriff.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	And then you insert the finger in it that holds the testicle, in it that is between the midriff, which is left to hold the rope of the testicle, and in the second midriff, and free from the attachment that is behind the testicle.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And then tightly with the rope which holds the testicles at their openings, and stretch out the white midriff over it on the left hand side, and raise the testicle to the opening of the section; and order the servant to extend it towards you and dissolve the attachment that is behind in a complete way.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And search with the fingers that whether there is any cause of the wrapped intestine in the white midriff.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	But if you do not find any cause from it, then return to your patient' body.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And then you take a needle that is strong and sharp with four threads, and insert it into the back of the midriff, which is behind the section; and then cut off its ends with the thread inside so that there are four threads left, and then fold them in a figure like a cross; and tie them firmly to the two sides.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And then fold the ends of the threads and tie them firmly with a tight knot, so that no vessel that is hidden there can transmit any cause for which an abscess would form here.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And then place another thread in the same way as the first, long enough so that it holds on to the hernia the amount of its size; and cut off all that is left according to the roundness of it, and leave the testicles with it.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And then cut off in the opening of the hernia by section from which runs blood and pain, as we have described above.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And then administer submergent wool in oil, and put it on the plaga; and administrate the thread that we have described (and sometimes the white midriff is cauterized, which we have mentioned above when there is a flow of blood, because some happen there) and leave the thread inside so that it falls.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	But if the cure has delayed, then add to it a little oil, and place it on the hernia so that it falls according to what we have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And then heal the wound with another cure of wounds within that is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter .lxi.
De hernia ventosa.	On Ventilated Hernias.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia, nothing has been seen that has been kept on the cure of it to make it possible.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first said that it is done like this that we have described in the hernia, which is that you place the vessels appropriately on it with ease; and dry them in their place near the abscess with oil, so that they fall.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And heal the wound as we have described within that is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter .lxi.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	On the pain that happens in the legs.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	And some break in the legs as we have said above, and leave the place.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And do not blame the genitals for any causes of the intestine, if you do, it is little; and return from them at all times.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	But if the time is prolonged with it, it causes a small fracture in the midriff within that sends the intestine into the midriff; and this happens because the midriff is extended as we have said above, and then it becomes soft and the place is inflamed and it starts to ooze.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the cure of it is by cauterization as the description of it precedes.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And some are cured by the way we have described: that is, let the patient ride between your hands, and dry up the place of the abscess with oil by section according to the quantity of three threads.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then tighten the white midriff that is below the hernia within that is revealed.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And then pick up the rope and place it on the hernia's prominent place, and place it on the navel's side.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And then cut the two prominent places of the rope's ends at the midriff' end, and adjust them with a stitch between them.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And then pull the end of the rope, and do not cut off the midriff from it all, or extend the testicles, or any other cause as you would like to know in the treatment of hernias of the intestine.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And that is healed with the cure of wounds, and when you cut off the threads, clean it up and restore the wound within that has been hardened; for the midriff contracts and the prominence of the rupture is not adjusted.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cauterization is better in this place, because it is closer to being saved.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter .lxi.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	On Softening the Testicles.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	In some men, the testicles are softened by oil as the flesh between them is also softened, and it is forbidden to look at it.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Then it is necessary for him who requests treatment that he let the patient lie on his side, and then he will fold all the skin which is soft over the natural skin, and he should close two lips to the suture.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you want, cut off the excess of the soft skin with three or four stitches and secure it firmly.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	Then sew between the sutures; and then treat for the treatment of other wounds within so that they are healed and the nails fall off.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter .lxxxix.
De castracio.	Of castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	Know that castration is forbidden by our law, more so because it involves the removal of an organ important for reproduction; therefore, it is necessary to recall this practice only in two cases. The first is when it is necessary to determine whether a person has been poisoned by another; the second is when we need to castrate other animals for their benefit and for our own, such as pigs, horses, or animals similar to them.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And therefore I say that castration should be done in two ways: either by cutting the testicles off or by making a section with a scalpel.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	More so in that which is done by cutting off the testicles, the path of the operation is that you make a cut on the animal's tail, so that the testes are soft and loose and hanging down.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	Then take those with your hand within so that they are firm and do not appear with the touch.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	More so in castration by a cut and section, cover that you have the animal and press the skin of the testes with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	Then remove the suspensory, and sew on each side with a single suture so that the two sides are joined together.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	Then sew up those pustules that you may have torn.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not leave any sutures over the cipha for a long time, but rather remove the sutures from the cipha slowly.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	This method of castration is better because it is done by cutting off the testicles, and thus there is no cause for the animal to desire coition.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	Then treat the wound within so that it heals.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter.lxxx.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	Of the treatment of hermaphroditism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphroditism in men is due to two causes: the first is when the space between the testes is cut off or narrowed down, which produces a female figure because there are no testes; the second cause is when there are both male and female genitalia present.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And some of those who suffer from hermaphroditism have urine in their testes.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	More so in women is one kind: and that is because the woman's genitals are located below the testes, which are of a man; but the female's genitals and two testes are above them.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	The treatment is of three kinds: with two men and one woman.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And it is because you should sew those parts together so that the odor of that person does not remain, and then treat those with a treatment for other wounds.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	In the second kind of man, in which there is urine in the testes, there is neither treatment nor operation for him.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter.xxi.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	Of piercing and flesh-eating because of women.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	Piercing that is strong and natural should be done with care so as not to cause harm, and it can be done if necessary for certain reasons; some women also have flesh-eating due to a certain infection that causes it to spread, and thus it is necessary to treat it with care.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Then remove the excess of piercing with your hand or with oil, and sew up.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not leave it unsown, especially at the base of the hair, so that it does not cause a flow of blood.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	Then treat those with a treatment for wounds within so that they are healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	More so in the case of raw flesh is flesh that grows out from within it, and it is strong enough to break away according to the appearance of hair; therefore, we should sew those parts with sutures as we do with piercing, and then treat them with a treatment for wounds within so that they are healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter.lxxii.
De curacio de alratica.	Of the treatment of biliousness.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Biliousness is when a woman's genitals are not pierced or are slightly pierced.
E es o natural o accidental.	It is either natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental is due to the malady that preceded it, and that person is caused by raw flesh or a subtle or strong suspension.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	It is done either in the base of the mother or between her legs or in the pus above or below her; it is prohibited to go out or to engage in sexual activity or to get pregnant, and it is strong enough to prohibit these things.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	The knowledge of that person is acquired by careful observation of the mother, if the opposition is apparent, probably so; but if it is not apparent, then carefully question that person with the fingers or with a stick.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	More so if the opposition is by a subtle suspension, and it is between the two lips, then carefully cut and break it up.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	It is because you pause between the two lips with your fingers, and then pause the stick that points to either side in front of them.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	The woman is on her side, with her legs spread open, and then carefully cut the subtle suspension that has broken out and the opposition that has opened up.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	Then take wool and sew it on with oil and pause that person in place, and mark the spot with a man each day so that the place does not become fixed.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	More so if the suspension is thick and strong, then sew it up with a blade of iron or with a leaf of mirra.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	More so if the opposition is due to raw flesh, then hang that person by a rope, and sew it up.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And they bring to you medicines that stop the flow of blood due to a bite, as well as headache, and blood of dragon, and ences, adjusted to milk of one side.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	Then administer a wide, blunt cannula made of lead so that the wound does not become fixed quickly.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	Hold that person for several days and administer a warm compress.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	Then treat that person with the other treatment of consolidation within so that it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	Sometimes in the native nature of other meats, and then sew up according to this method.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	More so if that is due to a seizure of crampy flesh, and the crampy flesh in the mother has not been caused by eating anything in a particular way.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter.lxxiii.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	Of the treatment of hemorrhoids and of the pain that occurs in the female's genitals.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids are those of the orifices of small veins that occur within, and when they are caused by the continuous flow of blood, they are painful; and when hemorrhoids are old, they are painful.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	I have already said in the division of these kinds into three classes: those who receive treatment and those who do not receive treatment.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Then I say that hemorrhoids and thrush are when they occur in the base of the mother and do not appear to be caused by anything; in those who do not receive treatment, there is no cure.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	May those who are in the mother's orifices where there is sensation, be treated.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And when you place the woman in a bath and rub her with scalding water, or with rough cloth, and cut those with razor blades.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	Then sprinkle on them the blood of a lamb from one of the powders that you have cut with poison, thus in an instant and like a shadow, they will escape.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	Then tie their feet for an hour, and then place them into boiling water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the blood continues to flow, then prepare for them a decoction of mustard and of scorching pepper and of garbanzo and of other things.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	Then take flour from the oven and mix it with honey and vinegar, and make a paste with water on their two hands.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the blood has been cut off, then it is well; and otherwise, make them adhere to two vents, and make a cutting on their nipples.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then take wool and immerse them in the juice of coriander or in the juice of arnica or in the honey of honeysuckle until it is well, and then treat the wound with ointment; and then treat the wound with oil within that it is healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	May those who are in rough treatment, if you treat them with water that is cold to your skin after the second time that I have mentioned in my instruction.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then treat that within it is healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter. 57.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	Of the piercing of the birthmark on the mother.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Special kinds of birthmarks come to the mother, such as warts and pustules and ulcers and scabs and sores and other birthmarks.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already mentioned these diseases and the kinds of those and their remedies in the division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And if you ask me in this treatise about the piercing of the mother's birthmark that you heal when it is born, and if you want to know how to perform the operation.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Then consider if the pain of the birthmark in its beginning is acute with percussion and fever, and sometimes that swelling, then do not pierce it, and treat that with water that helps with maturity until the acuteness of the accident passes.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	Then when you have made the woman lie on a platform that has two platforms; and she leans on her two feet and spreads her legs, and pauses her hands below her belly, and ties one to another with a rope that is convenient.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	Then the midwife follows from the right side and administers the instrument with which she pierces the mother's orifice, the shape of which will be determined according to those causes that you will do.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And when you want to administer this instrument, then place the midwife's hand on the woman' s belly, and that with which the instrument enters into the mother is not more than the midwife' s hand and the patient' s belly.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	If the instrument is larger than the midwife' s hand, then place powder on the texture of the hand of the midwife so that it is prohibited for the instrument to enter into the hand of the midwife.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And when you place the vessel that is on the right side and that the minister holds the instrument, and turns the vessel until it enters into the mother' s orifice.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when the excitement occurs, and it is touched with the hand and it is wet, then do not cut off those deves from the head of the patient with a sharp blade.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the pain has been relieved, then place on the skin a warm cloth soaked in rose oil or green oil and leave it until the scar is white.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	Then wash the mother's hair with clean wool dipped in water in which lavender flowers have been boiled.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then it is healed after two days by applying to it the ointment that you mix with water until it is well.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	Some women wash the mother and the baby with water in which honey has been dissolved, and apply to it the oil of a long-hair plant, and return to the ointment.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the pain is within the mother who has been washed, then do not pierce it, treating that with water that I have mentioned in the division.
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter. 57.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	Teaching midwives how to apply the piercings of the mother’s birthmark in a natural way when they are pregnant according to the following figure.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	A necessary cause is that the midwife recognizes in the beginning of the delivery of a natural child by signs of her, and it is when you see the woman express herself with open legs and smell the air, and over that is covered by water that comes to her from the part, and hurry up the birth, then know that this part is a second natural figure, and its expression on her head, and the second one hanging or suspended from her navel.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Then when you see those signs, then know that the mother’s belly is contracting so that the embryo may drop slightly from her head, and give it to her the second time, and it is shaped by those superfluities with good shaping.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu .i., o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	Then that other part is not natural and not worthy, because when the embryo is expressed on its legs and the navel is expressed in front of her head and her legs, and the mother’s hand on one side or on her neck, for example: or is expressed on her head and the mother’s hand, or is hung on her navel, and hard it turns over her shoulder, and like those not worthy figures.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	A necessary cause is that the midwife be wise and subtle in all these causes, and keep from error and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And I have shown you all the figures, and which one is in those because it is signified by water and stands on it.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the birth is expressed on her head by natural excellence, and that is violent to the woman and difficult, and sometimes its virtue has been weakened, then make a cut on her, or what the women have, evaporate her hair with fenugrec powder and olive oil.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	Then the midwife enters between her two legs and cuts it slightly with a small knife, or dry that with her fingers until it is well.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	Then press the mother’s belly until the birth occurs.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	If it does not express, then the woman is crisped with mucilage of seeds and mucilage of fenugrec in dressmaking.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	Then order it, and order that it be crisped, and have her sneeze, and keep her mouth and nose closed for an hour, because the birth is often delayed.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if the two more of the birth are sneezing at the beginning, then reduce those with ease little by little.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	If you do not obey the instrument, then place the woman on a platform and raise her legs, and if it is difficult to get up, then tie her feet to the platform; and the woman should be held so that she does not fall down.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the two more are not turning inside out and killing the birth, then cut those off and pull the baby from its navel with equanimity, because that birth is often delayed.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	From the emergence of the embryo on its feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the fetus emerges on its feet, then cover it with something to keep it warm and, little by little, turn the fetus over, and then tie it, and then take one of its feet and stretch it little by little.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	Mayst when it is born between the legs, then order that it be pressed and made to vomit; for if God wills it, there will be no need of an abortion.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it is not born in that way, then return the small fetus little by little until you place it according to its natural figure; for if it is returned like that, it will be born in the wrong way.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is forbidden to cut in all places that I have recommended, then take a line of oil and a solution of salt, and strike it all together well, and place the thread of the cord from the woman's pubic bone, the lowest part of her belly.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	Then make that cut in running water, so as to achieve a good incision.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when the openings of its legs become less painful, then make it sweat with mint and apply pressure to them.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when the sweating stops for an hour, then make it cut on a cutting board, and then make it sneeze and open its mouth; remove what comes out, and press little by little at the lower opening of the woman' belly, because the fetus will soon be born.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	The emergence of the fetus on its feet and its hands.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the fetus emerges according to this form, then you place its feet little by little; and the woman should lie on her side, with her feet raised, and hold her hands.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	Then press little by little on its belly, and extract what comes out from between its feet before it is ready to be born.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the fetus is not born in that way, then take its feet and move them violently; and press what is under the woman's belly little by little so that the fetus can come out through its openings.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	Then place its feet and tie the small fetus little by little; and order the woman to press herself little by little so that the fetus is not born in the wrong way.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	The emergence of the fetus in a lateral position hanging from one of its feet.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	Mayst be prepared for the woman to lie on her back; but if she cannot do so, then raise her and let her go down.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if she cannot go down, then make her lie on her back and strike with violence between her legs; and administer the remedies that I have recommended and that you know well.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if the child is born, then make it cut on a cutting board, and study its reduction; tie the fetus according to its natural figure, and make the woman sneeze and order her to press herself little by little so that she does not give birth in the wrong way.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	The emergence of the fetus on its back, with its feet and feet spread; its belly is against its mother's side.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	Mayst hold the child's body, and gently turn it little by little; and mayst do so with ease.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when it is tied, then place it on the string that I have recommended of oil and mucilages.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	Then order that it be pressed little by little, and when the eyes open, then make it cut on a cutting board and order that it be inclined to the right side, and order that it be pressed; and make it sneeze with ease.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	Exit of the fetus prepared over its side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When it is necessary to give birth to the fetus according to this method, then take care; and you shall cut the second one with your knife little by little until you achieve its evacuation of moisture.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the fetus is suspended over the woman' face and her neck, then you shall cut it with your knife so that it does not hang on and die.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	Then place the fetus in the openings from inside out until you stop it; and order the woman to press herself a few times, and if God wills, it will be born in the right way.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	Exit of twins or multiple fetus.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Know that twins are rare, and sometimes they are three or four; but this is strange, because there is a natural cause for it; but when there are more than four, they die in the womb.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And when it comes to the multiple fetus, know that they are often multiplied; one is born in the usual way through the mother' belly; another is born by natural delivery as a result of an accident; and some are born in the wrong way because they remain inside the womb too long.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if the delivery is difficult and it comes to water that I have mentioned because of the unusual figures, then take care of those as well because they are difficult to deliver.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the woman is subtle and gentle, and with patience, and is clever according to all figures; prepare it gently for her health.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Remember that man is made from a fetus in the mother' womb; and he is born when it is ready.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Some are formed in one, two, three, four, and five, and some are not formed until six, seven, eight, nine, ten, and a woman who has an abortion at six or more is said to have caused it with her hands.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And when this happens, mayst know that science is the reason for her strength because she was not afraid of that small appearance of water; and therefore pause there until you see it.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter LXVII.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	On the Extracting of the Fetus When It is Dead.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you care for the dead fetus with water that I have mentioned in the division of medicine and it is not born, then certainly use an operation with force; but consider if the woman is of sound health or not; because it is a loss for her.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Then the woman should lie on her back; and her feet raised, and her head inclined downward; and her legs separated.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	The minister should hold the child's two parts or its head in the woman' side so that it does not extend itself before the extraction of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	Then moisten the mouth of the mother with oil and a solution of salt, and of fenugrec and of the seed of fennel; and add to it.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	Then moisten the woman' body with these oils and solutions; then place her hand easily on the mother; and search for the child's head where its nails are.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	And a convenient place in it: then consider if the fetus is prepared to cut its head off; and you shall cut its nails with your knife, or its neck, or its tongue, or its palate, or its beard, or its collarbone, or the places near its shoulders, or its sides.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	But if the release is over its feet, then place it in the penthouse; or between its shoulders.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And when he has the oil in his right hand, and sets the curve of his palm on that place between the fingers of his left hand, and enters his hand with ease and keeps the oil in some of those places which we have said, before it reaches the cause of the pain.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	Then place and keep another oil in the position of his palm, or third if necessary, so that it is attracted by gravity, and not drawn out according to the recipe so much only.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And so it is useful at first, so that the inflammation of him is relieved thus as soon as it is made in depth the eradication of him.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And when in him that is between them that the extraction is softened; and if some part of him is retained, then when the mother unsets some of his fingers so as to say a word about it with oil, and enters them carefully and stirs them with those hands which we have said, and returns them into their place.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	And if the part of the fetus is outside, then the fingers are exchanged between the places which we have said, and made so that all the fetus is removed.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	And if the hand is inflamed on the other, and it is not possible to reduce that by the curvature of it, then when it is wrapped up well over that; and take out that part before all are removed, and cut that or at the joint of the hand or at the knee.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And so you can make the other hand and feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	And if the head of the fetus is large, or happens to it by the curvature in the inflammation, or is in the water, then when you enter between the fingers spined and cut off the head and extract the water, or dislodge that with an instrument which is called "alundat", the shape of which will come to the shapes of the other instruments in the chapter which is near this.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And in the same way if the fetus is of large head by nature: and then when you cut that with an awl or alundat, as we have said; and take out the bones with pliers.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head is inflamed and curved by the furcula, then cut it in so that the moisture which is in the feet is poured out.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	And if not complicated, and does not obey to inflammation, then you cut the head soonest according that at your service is possible.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the entrails of the belly are pomphous or in him, then you cut that part in so that the moisture which is in it runs out.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	And if the fetus is on top of his feet, then the attraction of him is light and its direction to the mouth of the mother is also light.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	And if the fetus is curved by the belly and feet, then when you extract that with a cloth which you have wrapped around your hand, and cut the belly and feet in so that the water which is in them runs out.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	And if the other members are still alive and turn back the head, then the mother puts her left hand; if the mouth of the mother is open, then she enters her hand in the front of it, and turns that to the mouth, and throws that with the fingers within, and throws those inside.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mouth of the mother is curved by swelling, and it happens to it by the juice which we have said, then when not disturbed it; in advance when administer a fluid that is moistening greatly.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And administer plasters; and follow the patient with water which softens and moistens.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the fetus is on top of his rib, then when possible it is, let him be cut out: and water which we have said to keep the live fetus.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if water is not possible, then cut that in pieces, and extract it.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	Then there is no cause remaining within the second.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have finished all your operation, then administer water which we have said of the cure in the swellings by swelling; and let those things happen to the mother which happened before.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if it happens a flow of blood from the mouth, then send that in strict water and administer the other cure.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And I have already seen a woman in her womb which had a dead fetus, and another child was found to be pregnant on that same day; and the other was a dead fetus.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	And it happened soon to another woman who had a swelling in her womb by swelling, and it swelled within so that the fetus was raised up; and she began to feel pain.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And I was called to treat him, and I treated him for a long time, and the plague did not become fixed.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	And then I put on him a few plasters of strong attraction, and drew out an arm, and passed some time, and drew out another arm; and I was astonished at this, for in the womb there was no arm.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then I thought that they were the bones of the dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	And then I cured the plague, and extracted from him some bones; for the existing woman in her own mind, and I have worked with that method for a long time, and corrected that little arm.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And I did not consider it strange, but that water has science and helps to the mother's illness which is treated by artificial means.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	From the shapes of the instruments which are necessary to extract the fetus.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Shape of turning around with which the mother is turned around:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the shape of strength in which the points are fitted, and by that fitting the points are two turns in two ends of a spike; and it is used to turn the skin around.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	And yet this turn is useful when it is put gently with caution; and it is made or of wheat or of oats or of barley.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And the length of each stalk is a palm and a half; and the width of each is a palm and a quarter, and the height of each is a palm and a little less. And the lengths of those two stalks are adjusted to that same type of stalk which is already closed, of which the lengths are the greater part of a palm and a little less, and the widths are two palms, or a little less.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two additions are inserted into the mouth of the mother so that it is opened by those two prescribed turns; and you make those turns with your hands.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Other shape similar to that more subtle and more light:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	Be made of wood or of iron according to appearance.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	However, at the end of it there are two additions, and the length of these additions is a palm, and their width is two fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to cover the lower part, then place your hand between the legs so that they are hanging down, and make a cut here.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	Then return your hand to the instrument in such a way that it is grasped according to the quantity you want of the mouth of the mother opening so that the needle makes its passage that you wish.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The shape of the turn, which they said the ancients:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	Shape of a push, which is pushed by a push:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	Shape of a hammering, which is hammered on the top head:
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	It is assembled with forceps at the end of it, several times, and some are forged long with the same type of forceps according to this shape, several times, which are dented here and there on the part that is to be cut, and marked and contoured.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Shape of a small hammering:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Shape of an unsharpened awl:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Shape of an unsharpened awl with two spines:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Shape of pliers which are closed on the part that has to be cut, and whose ends are marked and contoured:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	Shape of a chisel with two ends from which the top is separated:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Shape of two wide chisels:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All these instruments are used, and when the medicine is less or more of those, depending on the patient's condition, it is necessary that the doctor prepare it well, and when it is given to the sick person, it should be in a good way, and the men who give it must be qualified.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And do not open these instruments again once they are prepared, because the necessity of those is not excusable.
De extraccio de la segondina.	Of extraction of the second one.
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second one is held back, it should be commanded to the mother that she retain her child in her lap, and if it sneezes, it is good.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if not, then take a drop and pierce the cover with it, and place it in the mother's mouth, pressing and rubbing and anointing with chamomile and sage, and adding Arabic and cassia and holy wood.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them are submerged in water in the drop, and place it over the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	Then return a cannula of chamomile to the mother' mouth, and hold it so that the vapor comes out into the cavity of the mother.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	Then return to make her sneeze, and the second one is also forgotten with speed.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	If it remains, then return this purification to the mother's mouth with water or salt water, and if she does not sneeze again, then place her other hand over the one that has been used, and when the second sneezes, then remove this hand. If it is difficult, then return to make her sneeze, and if it is not possible, then return to the mother's purification with oil or salt water, and if she does not sneeze again, then return to the second one.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Then leave that it is turned around right and left easily.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And then return to adjust the quantity of attraction, because she will obey and avoid adhesion.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mother' mouth is closed, we have already described the purification with sneezing and the medicine of the drop with herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	If not forgotten with all the causes that we have described, then you should remember to do this again in the abstraction of the mother' mouth, but if it is not possible, and if it sneezes, you can prepare it by adding a little vinegar and salt, because this will cause her to sneeze.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	But if it is prepared, it has a bad smell to the head and the stomach, and then return to the mother' mouth; and if not possible, return to administer it with smoke and appropriately to water.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	Some of the Ancients have already prepared this purification by smoking with tobacco and dried fig trees.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	Shape of an instrument that is used to smoke the mother according to the retention of blood and the second one:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	Be made of vinegar or of oil.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	Then return the small end to the cavity and the wide one over the fire, and make the smoking over the fire' braids.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And hold it so that it is consumed by this smoking, and repeat.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	Of purification of the bottom of the non-pierced child.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	Make an incision at the bottom of the child' behind, which is not pierced, and then prepare with subtlety and precision.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then return to the mother that she pierce her child with this, and if not, then pierce it with an awl, and check so as not to touch the blood.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	Then return to that it is covered with smoke of wine and oil; and prepare this one with vinegar within which it is relaxed.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	If you fear that it will be burned, then return to pierce with a small knife, and if it is not possible, prepare it in the smoke of wine as described above. If the child wants to urinate, cover it with a towel.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And the burning of the bottom is due to the consolidation of plague or pustule; if this consolidation is carved out, then return to wash with water that we have described in purification and bloodletting.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	Of purification of the fistulas that we leave.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistula that we leave in the separation of parts is covered with a knot and its roughness according to the distance from the bottom or in the space between the two parts.
E es una fistula o motas.	And it is a fistula or a wound.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	With this knot, the wetness that comes out is white or mild, and some of these fistulas are piercing.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And these piercing ones are known by the exit of water and by wind; and some have used the exit of wine, and it is difficult to get out of those that come out quickly.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And some of these fistulas are located in the space that enters the bladder, and inside the neck of the urethra; and some enter the space between the hips and the pubic bone.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And with water in which the piercing fistula enters the bottom and not, it is because you put the child' mouth into the bottom, and return to try a little oil or iron into the fistula when it is not painful.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	If this is painful, then return to try a little iron or hair of a horse into the fistula when you feel the pain or the hair on the child' mouth.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel this or the hair in the mouth, and if it does not come out with the hook, then you will know that it is not piercing; then return to purification.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula enters the bladder or the neck of the urethra, the meaning is clear that it is urine; and the prohibition is that the location be treated with medicine to consolidate.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	If it is piercing into the space between the hips or the bone and causing pain in the loop of the hip, then the meaning is clear that it hurts here if it enters the bone, and hurting the loop; and that it is burnt there from time to time; and that this purification does not work with oil and does not consolidate.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those tubes penetrating into it there is no cure of any kind, and the cure of them is labour and futility of the medical practitioners who deal with them, over which they are shut up.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	But in that which does not penetrate and does not old there is expected the cure according to what you have told me, and what I have already heard and tried.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And it is that the patient lies between your two legs and raises his legs inside them, the cushions are inclined towards his belly, and then introduce the probe into the fistula, or iron if it is in the small of the back, into the spot where you feel pain, so that you know where the probe enters.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if he feels pain in his lower back when the patient lies down, then cover yourself so that you do not get hurt when the probe enters the anus.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel the probe enter the anus when it is already inside you, or feel pain between your legs and that part of the body, then certainly it enters; so do not try to treat that one, for there is no cure for it, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	But they say that it cures in some men.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And of the cure by which health is expected in him, that you use subtle cauterization according to the width of the fistula, thus: before doing it, introduce that same cauterization into the fistula until it enters through his anus; and then repeat it two or three times, until you know that all those adjusted fistula tissues, which are like feathers of an ash tree, have been burned.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And that one is cured with bandages wrapped around it, until all those tissues which are joined together are burned; and if it is healed with medicines that give birth to and strengthen flesh, then it is well; and if not, then it is not cured by any other cure.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if the probe enters and does not penetrate into the anus, between which and the probe there is a small piece of flesh or a fistula, and sometimes the fistula extends to where the skin is cut; then dry the skin from the beginning of the fistula, and you will see if the skin dries up completely with the probe; and if the fistula has been cut all the way through, then the probe is freed and passed; but if it has not been cut all the way through, then the probe goes no further.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	Then wash those fistula tissues which are joined together like a tube of ash, and do not let them be ripped by any other cause.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	But if blood comes out repeatedly between you and your work when you open those tissues, then the instrument which is used to stop it, whether it be with fire or with acute medicine, for fire cauterization does well in two things: it joins together those flesh tissues very well; and it stops any flow of blood from them by drying them up completely.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And that one is cured with bandages wrapped around it or with a three-pronged instrument, until the spot gets better; and then cure the gout with hot medicine that gives birth to and strengthens flesh,
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	and then treat it with medicines that make it tighten and stop bleeding; and when this has been done, then she is well and there is no fear of recurrence.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	But if the fistula has already entered through his anus and is long in length from its surface, then introduce the probe into his anus and feel it.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And if the probe goes in and is only skin or flesh between you and it, then it is near penetration; and there is no operation for him except by a trusted and hopeful method.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	The cause is to administer it in him one of three ways: either to cauterize it as we have said; or to dry it out completely within its cavity so that you can easily enter the probe into it and then cure it; or to lengthen it slightly with a sharp instrument, and then cure it; but do not cut it open because it will not heal; and if it leaks pus, then open the fistula at the opening of his anus, and clean out those foul-smelling secretions through his buttocks; and if the orifice does not get better and remains open, then open the fistula in the part of his anus from which he passes stool; but use cauterization to stop any bleeding.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes the fistula ends in this way: when you introduce the probe into the fistula, and it is in the part of his anus close to its surface and on the edge of his buttocks, then take care not to pierce it with a sharp instrument, for this is how you prepare the skin before piercing it;
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	and then put a thin bandage around it, or wrap it in it; and then introduce the probe into that same bandage, wrapped tightly around it, and then cure it; and if you cannot reach the inner cavity of his anus with the probe, then use a sharp instrument to open it.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	But if it penetrates into his anus towards the back, then you pull out that same bandage from there and then introduce the probe into his anus; and when you pull out one end of the bandage, then make sure to wrap both ends tightly around its other end so that they do not slip; and when you pull it out, let it rest for a day or two, and then if you put it on the flesh, it will stick to where those tissues are joined together, which are between the two ends of the bandage.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And that is how the disease is cured when it is healed and well.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	But if the opening of the fistula does not penetrate, then make it do so in some way, whether by cauterization or by piercing it, for you must pierce it so that you do not hurt yourself; and then cure it.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The shape of the probe that is curved: its curve is sharp and the other end is not, so that you do not hurt yourself; and this is how it is done when it needs to be done.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	Of stitches for hemorrhoids where blood flows in the opening of those.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hemorrhoids are like two things: either they are between the buttocks and look like charcoal, or those are with grass-like hair.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And those are small and large, and the blood from them flows together; and it is only in one place, and on its edges.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	But those that are in the part of the buttocks are according to two things: either there is little moisture in them, from which blood flows as yellow water or a little blood in one place; and according to the colour of the skin.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the cure for those inside his anus is that you order him to lie down, and to squeeze himself so that the hemorrhoids appear.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you cut off and hang them by nails or what you have; and then you pierdes those with your fingernails.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	But if those claws are not on them because of their moisture and softener; then take them by the sharp points, and remove those with a sharp object or a knife, and feel them where they join; and then cut off those with your nails, and then dry them up completely.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And that one is cured with the other cure, so that they are well.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the buttocks do not obey in leaving: then order the patient to lie down on his back, and to wash himself with that water which is in the anus, and that water will help him to leave easily; and then use a sharp instrument to cut through those.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	If the hemorrhoids are pushing out from behind, then the cause is itching, and it is because you are rubbing them with your fingernail, or with an uncut nail, and scratching them, and then treating them with water that has already been used to clean something dirty so that they are cured.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And whoever wants to do the incision, follow this method: take a thread and wind it around two needles, and insert those into the hole, and remove the hemorrhoids from above, and make the other end of the thread come out over the hole, and horizontally; then tighten the hemorrhoid by stretching firmly, and then remove the thread and needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	Do this to everyone, and leave one of them uncut, so that the excess blood from the body runs out from there.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	Then place a cloth over the buttocks soaked in rose water or wax; and place that on the patient's buttocks, and order the servant to pause.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then let that person sit in a box; and when it is wet, treat those with oil or another treatment until they are healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	Of treatments for fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Vapor-like marks appear due to drying out of a wound or natural contraction.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And since those old medicines are not effective for them, if you scratch them with a spithook or your fingernail so that they become wet and are drenched in the fluid above them, which prevents their consolidation, then treat those that have consolidated.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Then you should cut them off with a sharp tool so that the first hole, due to itching, becomes an ulcer, and treat those that have already healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	Of treatment for alamismire, it is finished.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	Know that alamismire is finished, and it is only if the skin takes on a color resembling a clove's head, and it affects the whole body, especially the feet and the toes, and because of them the pain should be directed upward.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And then you should know that it is cut where it is in the path of the claw, and if it is cut with scissors or an uncut nail, and then remove it from its root; and treat that one.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you want, cauterize the second one that precedes in the line of the claw's head.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	The common warts is a small, sharp, ulcerated, round spot on the surface of the body, and vapor-like marks appear in most children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	The treatment for them is to spread it and scratch it, or to stretch it with a thread inside where the box is.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you want, cauterize it, according to what we have said, with fire or acute medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And they are completely eradicated forward and backward using the instrument that I directed you to use.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	The common warts is a small, thick, ulcerated, round spot on the surface of the body that sometimes itches, and when the warts touch each other, they cause a pain resembling a bee sting.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	The treatment for them is to take a pen-like tube, and make it strong, and place that over the warts where it holds them in the circle of the pen's tip, and then turn your hand around the tube, so that you remove the warts from their root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, do this using an iron or lead tube according to this shape:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	It is important that the tip of the tube is sharp and silent (if not piercing), wrapped so that the liquid inside it does not come out, and then turn it.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you want, cauterize the warts according to what we have said before in the cauterization of athyr in the line of cauterization.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	Of the form of the instruments that are administered to give medicine.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Some marks are made of silver or lead or melted wax, and some marks are made of small instruments, because the instrument used for treating small children should be small; and that of the instrument used for treating adults is large, and those marks are small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The shape of the treatment mark is large and small:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The end of the tube above where the bag is attached should be wide according to this method; and it should be distinct from that place where the bag is attached, because sometimes it is wide and sometimes not.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the far end of the tube, which goes into the buttocks, should be silent  (if not piercing), turning from the side, and having two cuts, and on the other side one cut, and the width of the cut should vary according to the thickness of the rays and be wider on the small.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And the bag in which the medicines are held should be of a bladder or sheep's wool, and its stem should be a palm.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And it should be pierced by two cuts like this when it is turned over, and if the space between the cuts is large, then the tip is wide.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And then you should insert it into the cuts of a strong thread, which should be made of fine cotton, and adjust the bag to it; and when it is placed on the patient' head, let it be tight in the cap of the mark between two strong constrictions, and then mark each cut: The quality of marking them is that you fill the bag with medicine, which has been heated according to the tolerance of the patient; and be careful not to make it too long or too short.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	And then the patient should be laid on his back, and his legs lifted up so that they are under two pillows or a mattress; and apply the tip of the cauterizer to oil or white of egg or mucilage of fenugrec or something similar; and insert it into the buttocks with ease, and the minister takes the bag and squeezes it with two hands and expresses it with force so that it flows into the crucible in which the treatment is being made; and then remove the treatment and the patient lifts his legs from the mattress.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine forces him to sneeze, hold back as much as you can; and if he sleeps for a whole night, it is better to wait until the next day.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	If you treat them with medicines that relieve gas in the stomach and sneeze, then you should repeat the treatment if they still sneeze after using those medicines.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if in the buttocks there are hemorrhoids or painful swelling, then it is the treatment mark being small and silent, according to those marks with which children are treated.
De curacio de las plaguas.	Of treatment for plagues.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	I have already said and explained in the division of the treatment for plague which medicine is suitable, and I will explain that again as follows:
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Thus, the plague differs according to where it is caused and according to the place where the infection takes place.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	The causes of the plague are different according to whether it is caused by a person's behavior (such as drinking or eating contaminated food), cutting with a knife, hitting with a lance, a spear, or similar to those who cause wounds.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	And the plagues that are in a person' body are different according to whether it is caused by a plague on the head, or the neck, or the feet, or the stomach, or the arms, and similar to those who affect members.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And I recommend the treatment of some diseases so that this reasoning stops and takes place on other diseases.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And I will begin with simple headaches, because the memory of the composition will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Then say that when it happens in the head simple headache and is not fracture, consider: if it is by thinking of water or of appearance, and has already trinquada the nose so only and is a great pain and you are afraid about this patient will have an apostema cauterization, then you get up and do cauterize the head with wine so much, and do not delay there; and extract it to that person according to the quantity of its virtue if no more cause prohibits cauterization, mostly if the headache is caused by a headache from little.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And it is cauterization of the opposite of the diseased part; and protect that patient from repletive things, from food and from thick foods.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	But if by the minimization there is some prohibition, then it is lessened by food and do not bring it close to meat or drink.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And pause on the disease, if to him happens apostema cauterization, then pour pure oil or wine in which is styptic.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	But if it is safe from cauterization, then pause on the disease, if it is recent am its third day and the air has not changed that powder which I recommend to put there small.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed that powder, then pause on a wound with wine until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	But if the disease is big or it is by cutting of space and of appearance, and their lips are not closed with sutures, then adjust those according to what I recommend for the suturing of them.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	But if the disease has already been discovered from the bone and it is not repressed but only a small suspension, then cut off that one and cure the disease with medicines and restore the flesh to its place instead of the nose, and order for this patient that he eat food in which there are gross things: cheese and bread and butter, or whatever is available.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if there is putrefaction in the nose and it does not stick to the bone, then you cut off all of it and pour it out, and then cure it.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	But if in these diseases there is an artery or a vein from which blood can flow from the disease and it is not cut off by medicines, then you inquire about that artery, and if it has been cut off, then cut it off with a blade, or stick it; and if necessity forces you so that what we have said does not suit you, then cauterize it so that the disease be cut off.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these diseases are simple and small, the cause of them is dry; so that you sprinkle on those powder, because when consolidated that one before the air has changed it.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	And the way of that powder is this: take a part of oil from a tree, two parts of dragon's blood, three parts for an unknown cause; all mixed together and well shaken, and if there is disease filled with blood, and it is confined by good constriction until it sticks to it, then it is coagulated with the blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And then put that powder on it and leave it alone, and do not take it off until it is healed, because it will not become apostemic, since it has not been treated with medicine.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	But once in a while, water only, when it is not at your side in the presence of oil and dragon' s blood.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And this operation is done in the big diseases when it is convenient that they be paused on those and well-closed, and only recent diseases whose air has not changed them.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has changed them, especially in summer, then it is not convenient to put this powder on them, but rather cure them with water that we have said, or rather pause on them with wet garlic juice or with flour of wheat mixed with water and honey until they are healed; and then cure them with other treatment until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	But if it happens in the fracture of a bone, and it is small, then you extract water with gestures.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And I direct the treatment for fractures of the head with poison.
De las plaguas del col.	Of the diseases of the neck.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	But if the disease happens in the neck, then it is not difficult to distinguish from the treatment of a simple headache.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	But if the nerves of the neck are cut or an artery, then if it is a nerve, it is not in its place but is avoided treatment with water that causes severe constriction, so as to avoid injury and pain because it affects the nerves and hurts them.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And you do not pause on the disease for any reason, because the substance of nerves is red and the continuation of them is to the skull, which is the pus of all the members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	But if water is used for treatment with herbal medicines, so that it is washed in double water, a drop of red oil or not red, and a drop of minora when it is washed with double water and the other remedies are minora according to this way, and dip it in water.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	But if the disease is big, then administer sutures or clamp the lips together, and then cure it with powder until it is healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	But if the disease has depth or happens in the lowest part of the pus, then pierce that one in the place most affected.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	But if the disease has already been cut off and there is a flow of blood from it, then separate or dry that one, or stick it together, or cauterize it if necessity forces you to water.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the vertebrae of the neck have been cut off completely and only the veins of the neck are left, then you adjust the lips of the nose with sutures on the top of the jawbone and do not touch that one; then reduce that one to its natural figure, and tighten it with a good constriction, and leave it alone; and then cure it with wet garlic juice in which there is stinging and excitement until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	But if the disease has been done in the bone with injury, then strike that one, and if there are fragments of bones, extract them all; and if it is not covered by a covering, leave it alone until the disease is healed, and separate and clean its edges so that they do not hurt each other.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the disease is recent, then sprinkle on it the powder which I have recommended for you.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	But if the disease has been done with a fistula, then cure it with water from which the memory of composition will come in the third chapter.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Of the diseases of the neck or of appearance when they happen between the shoulders and are done with a space, or with a knife, or with a lance, or with appearance.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a cut of a knife or a lance, and it has depth, then consider whether the patient is gasping or not; you should know that the disease is dangerous.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	But if it does not have depth and the disease is recent from its third day, then you pause in it on the first hour with powder, and do not tighten it so that the disease is not held in its depth, and return to the patient, and release that one two times a day; and if the disease is in the eye, then pause there also with an attractive oil.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the wound is not present, then place it in the orifice of the plunger so that the water comes out and runs through its opening; and let the patient sleep on top of the plunger so that the water runs through his body.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	But if after three days or more the spasms and tremors in the patient's body do not disappear, nor does his bowels move properly or his other bodily functions, then know that the plague is cured; then treat him with calamine and the other treatment until he is healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	But if the patient's healing has been delayed and the wound is still open, then know that a fistula has formed; treat it with vinegar.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the plague is from a cut or knife wound, and it is simple on the surface of the foot or leg, then treat it with water that has been preceded by suturing, if it is large, or powder, if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	But if it has already formed a pus inside the bone, and it is already separating from it, then place the wound on the plunger and squeeze out those separated parts, if they are separate.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	But if they are not separated, then let it rest until the plague is expelled, which is accomplished easily.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And of the other accidents of plague in the other members, the cure is the same as that which we have said.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of the plagues in the abdomen.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The discomfort that occurs in the abdomen can be great, small, or moderate.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	Of the large hernia, there are visible bumps or swelling due to a hernia bulge and the nerve endings being very sensitive.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	A small disruption is difficult to treat in any other way, and if you do not prevent its intrusion into its place quickly, it will become very difficult, for it widens and thickens due to the intrusiveness of its contents.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And therefore the mildest disruption is better, because in this one it is not difficult to reduce the hernia, but it is difficult in the two mentioned above.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And know that abdominal surgery is done in four ways; but twice as many surgeries are common to all the other plagues of the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And two others are proper to the other plagues, but only one is proper to abdominal surgery.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And I recommend to you each explanation and description.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	So I say that when the plague is small and there is no cause of the hernia for it, and it is difficult to reduce it, then it is in two ways: either because of the mildness of the disruption as we have said, or when the hernia bulge becomes thicker due to the cold air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And therefore, when it is like this, I recommend that you cut off the hernia in such a way that you dip a sponge or cloth in tepid water alone, or that you take it into tepid water, and caraway, and aniseed, and spice, and rub on the hernia until the swelling is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	Some veal are made with a stimulant that increases their temperature, and it is better than tepid water in resolving swelling.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And if you see that the swelling has been resolved, then moisten the hernia with water in which it was placed high and cold, for by water it is eased due to a few causes.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	But if the hernia does not respond to this treatment, then cut off a small piece of the hernia with a sharp instrument, as it is inserted there to treat hemorrhoids.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And the first treatment is better when it is proper that it should not be cut off, and that it should not be occupied with drying out unnecessarily and starving itself.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	As for the instrument, consider its shape:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	The one has a sharp, the other has an obtuse, and the tip is slightly blunt, not very acute.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And therefore, when the hernia has grown larger and is protruding from its place, then know that the reduction of it should be according to its natural shape, in its own place, if possible above water, because it is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	But when the disruption is wide and it is in the lower part of the abdomen, then place the patient on their back, and pause their buttocks higher than their head; and if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then place the head higher than the buttocks.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And apparently if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then pause your attention and consideration momentarily in order that the part where the plague is may be higher than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And thus you will administer water in the great plagues and in the moderate plagues.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in the small plagues, prepare the water that we have said, and let the minister be between your two hands, which has the entire disruption under it and adjusts the lips of it, and let it discover the cause of the surgery from another part.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	This is the common way of suturing: one that takes the needle, or counts the needle according to the amount of the width of the plague; and let go of the end of the disruption of the little finger, and tighten the needle, or another that you do not insert into the two ends of the knot, both ends of the string that is left inside the incisions, until it enters through that incision; and you have added the two ends of the knot and made four orders.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And let it tighten with two double threads in the circuit of the needle, and sometimes add the two ends together, and let go of the width of the finger, and let it tighten one end of it, and let that end be tied with a knot, and let it be added to the other end; and let go of the thickness of the little finger, and let another needle enter into it, and let it pass through that one, and let that one be tied with a knot, and let it be added to the other end; and do not cease to make water if need be, adding the needles until you have completed the whole tension of the plague.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And let the small needles be between fineness and subtlety, because the fine needles pierce the flesh easily; and the thick ones are a difficult instrument in the knot, and therefore by water let them be both fine and subtle and coarse.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And I do not know that the needle is fixed in both ends of the knot nearest to it because the flesh should not be easily pierced and the plague should not become established before its consolidation.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And do not prolong the surgery so that the plague is not prevented from being consolidated.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And let the ends of the needles poke into the patient so that they do not rest on their back and sleep; and pause over the sutures of all parts, which have the ends of the needles; and let them be inside until you know that the plague has been consolidated.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	And these special sutures with needles are more convenient in small plagues because they only need a single needle or two or three to hold them together.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	But the second is like this: and it is that you administer to the four ends, of the knot and two extremities of the string, in one incision, with a needle that you have tied; and let it be wrapped up in fineness and subtlety.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And when the needle will have penetrated these four ends, reduce the needle from that meteyssa part where you began to use it, so that the thread retreats from the sub-upper part of the incision into the plague, so that the suturing is according to a stitch with thread on the cloth that has been tightened.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And place between each stitch the thickness of this small thread.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this stitch knows the men.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And I sewed up the wound that had been made in a man's abdomen by a knife, which had caused the eruption of a larger plague of a palm, and was an outlet for the bug of two palms from his navel and was a rupture in the middle of the member; and then I reduced what was broken so that the bug did not come out.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the plague was consolidated in the space of fifteen days or so, and I healed him and his wound was cured; and then I applied honey to it to promote healing, and he recovered his health.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And the other wounds had not healed; but by a miracle they healed, because I did not heal him with oil, for it was in a place where oil does not help or benefit from any medicine, but I applied a patch of wool over the wound twice a day and washed it thoroughly with honey every day until he was healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	Then I made two kinds of stitches according to the narrative of Paracheus.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And you began to sew with the knot, and you put the needle in from the outside into the inside.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And so with the needle penetrating into the knot and into that meat, according to the prescription and length of all the body, and leaving the end of the thread in which you have put the needle; and make the needle penetrate from the outside into the inside in the middle of the body, and leave the other end of the thread at a distance from the part where you have made the first stitch.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And when you have made that penetration, then you make another stitch in the same place from the outside into the inside; and leave the end of the thread at a distance from the part where you have made the first stitch. And so you continue making stitches one after another until you have gone all around the body.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And make that penetration with your needle in the thread which you have made to pass from one side of the body to the other.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	Then begin to work from that side of the body and continue your needle's work at the end which is in the middle; and bring out the thread from the other side where you have made a stitch, and tie it off there.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And make another stitch, and another, and so on until you have finished sewing everything up according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the whole method of sewing is that you sew with stitches so small that they cannot be seen; and that you sew the knot once at one end of the thread, but leave the other end free.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	And the second kind of stitch is called Gulia, and it is done by speaking and counting; that is, you sew with one knot at each end of the thread, but you add nothing between them; and you apply one end to another, and the other to the end opposite to it, and so on according to how many times you want to count.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	And when you have brought your needle to the end of the body again from where you began, and made the same kind of stitch there; then bring the needle out through one side of the body, and make another stitch on the other side from inside the body; and bring the needle back in again on the first side where you started.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	Then return those patches and make another penetration from inside the body to outside in two other places on the opposite side, which are in the middle; and bring out your needle again.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this method of sewing is better than common sewing, and it is a kind of stitch that I have mentioned before.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the speech of Gulia
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And it is called a stitch of the belly, which is made with two needles; and you should put your needle in from one side where there is a hole, and begin to make stitches according to the method described above for making stitches on animals' throats.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	You should know that when a rupture is in the middle of the belly, the stitch is more difficult than for other parts of the belly.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	And the judgement of medicine to cure the plague is different from that of other plagues.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	And the cause is that when you bring the patient to the saint in advance of the person who has the plague, and reduce the bug and sew it up properly, then apply powdery incandescence.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the plague, then apply powdery incandescence to those parts which are in pain and which make a hard sound when touched, and they will be consolidated knot and thread; and then you will heal that person as is done for other plagues, unless it is cured.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	But if you do not have medicines, then apply to the wound only, and wash it thoroughly with water every day until it is healed; for you will not need other medicines in this case, since simple plagues are easily cured by applying them to the affected parts, as you have taught yourself.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	But if you fear that the common plague will spread to the principal members, then cover those parts with wool dipped in a wet quality of oil, or rose water, and place it between the muscles and leaves them in place.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if there is pain or decay in the belly, which is caused by bad air, then apply to it a black stinging substance made of vi, and more so if the decay has reached the belly and there are pus-like emissions penetrating into its concave shape.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	You should know that the gross belly is of a kind of bad air, and it has healing power for that which is in the thin belies.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And it is difficult to heal because the belly that is called "gegunu" does not receive healing from any plague that enters into it of all things; and this is because there are many veins in it and they are large, and its subtlety and nearness to nature's nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	But if the thing that you are treating from the plague is cloth, and you bring it from a distant place, then reduce it according to your method of reducing thin bellies.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	But if it has passed into the space and has become wet or dark, then bind that place with thread tightly where it is injured, to prevent blood from flowing; for in cloth there are veins and arteries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	Then cut off that piece, and bind two ends of the thread to the edge of the wound on both sides from where the plague has entered; so that your hand will be relieved from that attraction which it has from the cloth and emission of the plague's bad air.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Rememberance of the plagues when they occur in the belly.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When a rupture occurs in the belly and is small, then it may be possible to heal some people, but that is because I have seen such a thing; for there was a man who had been struck by a lance in his stomach on the right side, and that man's plague was old and had become a fistula, and he had an abscess and putridity.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Then I saw the cure for him had not yet been found in order to heal him; but I removed the abscess from within until it healed and the place was consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And I had placed a covering over the patient's abdomen, holding it down on the bed where she had been struck by misfortune; and I did not allow any misfortune or illness to strike her or her body in its natural order of things, eating and drinking, and I kept them both between baths and exercise.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And I have heard that when the bowel becomes blocked, and is small, then cover it according to this method: for you take a piece of string from a large container; and then join the two sides of the blockage together, and place one of those pieces over the two sides of the blockage; so, when he takes hold of those and tightens his hand, cut off the end of the string, because it will stick to the two sides and will not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	Then place another piece next to the first one, and do not stop making pieces as you go along all the way through the blockage.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	And then cut off that piece, and continue doing so until the blockage is gone; and no harm will come to the patient.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the bowel will be tied together by a thin thread which comes from the bowels of animals because it is made of the same material as needles; and you take the end of those threads, and it is dry, and then join the end of it to a thread from another bowel, wrapped up, and then insert that thread into needles and tie it to that thread, and reduce it in length.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	This method of stitching together using threads is just another way, a backup plan, to trust and hope for the best.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	Perhaps if the blockage is large and wide, mostly because then there will be no other option but to cut it out, and it will not heal completely.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	Of surgery on the gut and the fistula.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	Did you know that all blockages and abscesses, when they become infected and old, turn into ulcers, and are not consolidated and get better on their own over time; and then, in any part of the body, it is called a fistula, and we call those old infections 'zuchem'.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And a fistula, in truth, is a hollow and deep wound, white where it is, and painful when touched; and so it is called 'rizatz', that is, pain.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And it is in men who are wet, and their strength leaves them; and the moisture is absorbed away in a few hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And sometimes that moisture becomes dust, which is little and thick, and it is fine.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And I have seen it before in the middle of a division, and then when I said that the blockages were ulcers, which are not healed or are on the naked flesh, they are caused by one of these nine things: because there is an imbalance of heat in the body; or because of poison; or because there is hard flesh between the mouth and the lips; or because it is a dry substance; or because the ulcer has putrid matter inside it; or because the medicine is unsuitable for its treatment; or when corruption spreads in the region, and then it becomes a plague; or because nature finds it difficult to digest that poison; or because one bone is missing, or many bones.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	I have shown all of these causes, and those are the reasons why ulcers form, and their treatment with medicines in the division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And I have told you how to heal the fistula, which is done through surgery.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	Did you know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body; because they can affect veins, arteries, nerves, the colon, or any organ, or one of the joints made up of many bones, and are similar to those of a main member and its neighbors.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And then of those fistulas that are done in this way, the most difficult to heal are those who do not respond to treatment, and they occupy a person's time and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if one of those fistulas is very deep and does not reach those places that are mentioned, and you wait and trust in its healing; then try to cut it or tie it up, and if the fistula follows the course of medicine, and you inquire about it.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	Perhaps if the fistula is twisted, then investigate it with a thin needle, because lead is lighter and it will follow the curve of the twist.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula is causing terrible pain, then you cannot imagine how to treat it.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Then clean the opening with salt, because the moisture that you put on it will run to all openings and leave them alone.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	Then inquire carefully, according to which method you can understand if there are any bones or nerves; and it is the depression of the fistula, distant or close, and it has only a few openings, and it is on top of everything, and you recognize your pain, and you compress your hand over the spot, and similar meanings and causes of accidents to the ulcer.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have sorted through all of these causes with certainty, then go to the treatment according to confidence: and it is that you consider if it is a fistula in a close location, or away from a joint, or a nerve, or an artery, or a vein, or one of those places that I have told you about.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then dry out the fistula according to what has been said before in the description of it, and that water is produced from it, and that it comes from the opening of the flesh, or hair, and similar things; and treat it so that it heals.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	Perhaps if the fistula is very deep, and follows the course of medicine, then cut it as much as possible, and thoroughly clean all its corrupted flesh; and then apply sharp medicines, and insert them into the depression of the fistula, which you have understood with precision by using a needle.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	Then pour it onto the fistula, within some small vessels that the sharp medicine eats away everything that is rotten in its depression.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And then restore that to its place with a strong hand, so that all corrupted flesh is removed; and it will be healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	Perhaps if it is not healed by water, then you cauterize it according to what we have said before.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	Perhaps if the cause of the fistula is a bone, and it should be certified, then you investigate and dry it out according to what we have said before, unless you find a vein, or a nerve, or one of the main members as we have described.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	Perhaps if the bone is discovered and it is in any corruption or darkness, then you cut that part off completely, so that the corruption is entirely removed; and then pour water on it where it needs to be healed.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it is not healed and gets worse, knowing that you have not completely eradicated the corruption; then you will discover on the second try, with great care and precision, the reason for it and clean it thoroughly; and then restore that.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And so if it is healed, then it is good; but if not, you know that the corruption is in the depth of the body, which cannot be reached, and then you go to that part where it cannot be cured.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the bone is rotten, small, or your hand can reach it, use small tweezers to extract it.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if there are any bones left, extract them carefully and not a single one should be left to cause you problems with your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	But if there is any discomfort from the moisture, and in their incision there is neither fear nor mistake, then cut those ligaments or muscles if they are here, and free the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	But if you are not prepared to heat the bones of your hand, then pause over the water that can cool the wound, and leave that flesh and ligaments in place until the bone is solid, and ensure that the section you have made is secure and not compromised.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	Then, if you wish, pause over the triple-strength oil, or the Egyptian ointment, or one of the green ointments, for when these ligaments are washed away, and the bones are separated from each other, and this attraction is eased.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	But if it is a large bone like the spine or hip or leg, and that which is corrupted is the surface only, then cut away this blackness and corruption completely, and then restore the wound.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	But if what is corrupted is a large part of the bone, and corruption has already reached the marrow, then it is necessary to close this and cut it completely within the area where the corruption has entered, and then heal it within that which is solid.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I recommend to you that an experienced man assist you in this case, so that he can pause and support your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	Choose a young man of about thirty years, to whom pain has spread from the hip, and the large mass has moved deep into the body where the substance has spread from the hip, and this is the substance of an abscess, and not caused by an external factor.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And then, when the time was right, approach it with care for the error of the doctors that had occurred before it became severe, and quickly address the matter, and make incisions in its surface, which all gave pain and the moisture of the body.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And then various doctors have treated him for two years, but I was called in.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And I saw the legs of him and the fluid running from those orifices over a large area; and his body was completely limp, and its color was yellow.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then I inserted my hand into one of those orifices and felt the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	Then I looked carefully at all the orifices, and I found that they were due to large fractures of the spine.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	Then I lay down and cut open one of the orifices, through which I discovered a fracture of the bone, and extracted what was corrupted, and it was already dry and rotten and disintegrated; and one of the spine fractures had penetrated into the pelvis.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	Then I carefully closed what I had discovered and prepared the bone for surgery.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	I recognized that it was not a fracture of the bone but the corruption that I had extracted and closed up, and I had already removed it completely.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	Then I continued with the restoration of the wound using consolidating medicines for a long time, until it was consolidated.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	Then I returned and examined the bone again after the first discovery, and continued to extract the ongoing corruption with the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	Then I carefully removed what remained of the corruption, and then I continued with the cure and restoration of him, and it was not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	Then I discovered another fracture on the opposite side, and did not cut into the bone little by little, and continued with the cure, and it was not restored until I cut into the bone around a palm of it, and I extracted the marrow, and then I continued with the cure using medicines, and it was consolidated slowly and healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	There was no need for further surgery or incision in this case due to the patient's frailty and lack of tolerance for pain and risk of death, since these occurred at all hours due to excessive vomiting and fainting.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And so he healed completely, and there is no replacement for hard bone; it returns to its original strength, and his movements are natural and free of pain in all parts of his body.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	But if the bone is prominent in place of the body, then cut it according to this method: and that you take a ligament and tighten it at the end of that bone, and command someone to extend that ligament in its length; and pause that ligament of wool made fine; and then bind that over the flesh which is left on the bone, and extend the end of it so that it reaches where you want to cut it, and discover the flesh on that spot which you wish to cut with a knife.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	Then set your hand firmly upon the bone, for when you make an incision it is not forbidden to use a knife that does not cut the rotten flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	Then cut the incision little by little, since if it is in the concave part of the bone and does not appear on the surface as seen, then force the ligament to tighten on the opposite side.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	If the bone is corrupted and prominent, then move it a little continued way towards the other side, and the corruption is in its middle or in one part of it; then discover all the flesh completely, and then set your hand firmly upon it, and tighten it at the end where the corruption is.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And let the incision be made according to the location of the corruption a little way, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	But if the corruption is in the joint, cut that joint which is corrupted, and tighten the bone at the end where it continues towards the other side.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	But if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not a reason for cutting but a reason to be left alone.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	If the corruption is in the chest or neck, it is difficult; however, if you inquire about how the corruption appears to you, and cut it according to its appearance, and make a decision according to each case which is possible for you, and correct it as needed, then do not cut any veins or nerves.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And know what instruments are suitable for this operation, and prepare them carefully, considering the situation of the bones, their size, subtlety, greatness, or smallness, and their hardness or rarity; so that you prepare everything necessary for a special operation with appropriate tools.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And know that this operation requires a special tool which you must carefully study and understand the techniques of this art, and witness the consequences of mistakes, for since you have already made them with your own hands in the past, you know what is required of these instruments for any operation.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	I will leave you with the number of instruments that I have described up to this point, and you can refer to them as needed when performing operations based on your restrictions which you will experience in the future.
Forma de serra:	A serra se l'utiliza per les partz del cors que no corren per la carne o per les articulaciones.
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another sere:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another sere:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Form of a great sere again:
Forma de ray:	Form of a ray:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	So the head of this ray according to the form of the star's claw, and the points of it are according to the form of the points alstefegi.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And there is not any that can be used except that you make the heads of the joints rot when they are rotten, or the great mouth is wide open.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Form of a great razor of the other ones:
Forma de razori menor:	Form of a small razor:
Forma de razori lat:	Form of a broad razor:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Form of another sere properly done: Be it done by an arc of it and the sharpness of it with a knife-like edge, and the member of it with a dagger-like edge properly done.
Forma de lu:	Form of it:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Form of a razor having a concave form:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Form of another subtle razor:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Form of another curved-edged razor:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Form of a small razor resembling a tentacle:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Form of an incisor that the bones are not incised by it:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Form of another minor incisor:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Form of another incisor resembling a ray, and the end of it is like a sere, and it is displayed in motz locs in the edge of the bones:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Form of a ray that conveys to the perforation of those bones:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And its end is triangular and has an acute point.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	It is made of Indian steel, and the shape resembles that of a ray, and all the causes that we have spoken of razors and incisers and serrations are true.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	Of the incision's extremes and the locking of the bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The extremes may be curable either by an intrinsic cause or by an extrinsic cause, and because you treat that corruption with those medicines and the cure does not confer, or sometimes the corruption arises from within that member so that it comes to pass that the member itself is destroyed by water of death or of malice which is a greater destruction of the member.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the sign of that to which it happens, is that the member is made black within so that it may be seen that fire has burned it, or it may be made black properly within so that the corruption that happened there enters into that member and touches all the body; and therefore cut you out that incision of it.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And apparently if the cause of corruption is from some poisonous causes thus from a scorpion of the sea or a weasel or a rat and in similitude.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or the incision is at the end of that, then you incise it and do not give space for the corruption to pass so that it does not enter into the hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And apparently if you approach that member, then you incise it from the edge of the fire, and do not give space for the corruption to pass so that it does not enter into the hand of fire of the arm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if instead you cut that member, then you incise the arm within the joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if the corruption passes around that joint, then in that member is the death of the patient; and another cause is added to it in quantity of virtue.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And apparently if corruption comes from that foot where it is corrupted from the other foot, then you incise it within one of your toes.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if it takes hold of a toe of the foot, then you incise all of the foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	Maybe if it can be made to enter into the nape, then you incise the back within the junction of the nape.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if corruption has already come about on the nape, then there is nothing left but destruction, and let the patient die.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	And the way to incise that member or to cut it is so that you stretch the ligament at the end you want to incise, and stretch another ligament over that place; and extend the minister a ligament to the ends of them, and extend the other minister a ligament over them; and you separate the flesh which is between those two ligaments as far apart as you can, and that incised or cut.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	It is so that it does not touch the place in any way so that it does not cause injury, and that it comes to the patient's wound with an appropriate cautery and poultice.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	Maybe if you happen to be in flux of blood when you work, then you cauterize the place properly, or put some powder on it that tightens the blood; and then return to your medicine properly.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then you cut off the infected member with a ligament properly, and cure it within so that it is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And I recommend to you that you go to a man in his own foot, this is the accident which happened to him in his own foot by being burned so that it was gathered together by fire's combustion.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that corruption first came about in his own foot within so that it tended all of the foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that man prepared himself for that purpose properly so that he came to the member with the velocity of his foot which is suffering from pain and from the burning of his foot, and incised that foot within the junction, and fire healed it.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	A long time came to him that corruption in the member of the hand by accident.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then he came to me, and so I pierced it properly by putting on the body of medicines, according to the changing of his body; and there was not a response from that superfluitat, and it began to go to the other foot within so that it began in the hand.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And then he asked me to incise his hand, and I did not want to do so with the expectation of a response from that superfluitat, and more than that I had to cut off his hand properly because the virtue of that patient was over death.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And then he left me, and returned to his own country and came to me that man who prepared himself; and incised his whole hand, and it was healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I have not added to this narrative but that it may be an assistant upon him who is suffering from this malady, and that it may be a sign by which it may be recognized and according to which it may be turned.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	Of curative medicines and their quality with drugs.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When the pus appears on some fleshly parts of the body and the space of the pus is prolonged within so that it forms a collection of pus, then cut it properly and pierce it, and let the blood come out of it, and clean up that place by taking off a thin skin, and do not cause injury to any bone or ligament or joint; it is called a sinus, and is not named a fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	Maybe if the space is prolonged within so that corruption comes up next to some member, then it is called a fistula and not named.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And the cure of it is that you incise all of that sinus properly, and more so when it is made thin and is done with a cloth, and confirm that it does not adhere to the place by its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	Maybe if you hope that the sinus will adhere and that that corruption has not come about by a previous corruption, and in the sinus there is pus on the surface, then you treat it with a poultice.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And it is that you consider the sinus, and if it is large, and the arm which has the odor is of fetid smell, then clisterize it properly with an Egyptian medicine consisting of oil and honey and rose water, and let them be mixed in a vessel, and let them be put on fire so that the medicine boils and comes to the top of the water.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And then you take from him the water that is necessary and dissolve it with honey, and clisteryze the person's belly, and tighten his orifices, and leave the medicine in him for the quantity of two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And then extract that with a strainer; and make water for so many days until the person' belly is cleansed and their shame is relieved.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And some people are clisteryzed with ash water, when this medicine is not effective at present; and that you take the ash from the vine, and put it on the water; and then strain it and clisteryze it inside them so that you swear that the belly will remain closed.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the patient does not tolerate Egyptian medicine or ash water, then clisteryze it with honey and mix zink three times, and clisteryze it with wine and honey mixed, for honey has a property of cleansing and washing, and wine binds the belly, and most importantly when there is excess stiffness and dryness in it.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you make water a few times and are confident that the belly is relieved, then clisteryze it with water that softens the flesh in it.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And that you take a syrup of daphnicum and dissolve it with rosin oil and wine, or that you clisteryze it with some medicines and ointments that I have already described in the treatise on ointments.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the orifices of the belly are tight in which the canal of the clistery is not received, then you widen it little by little, and pause in it a few folded envelops of Egyptian ointment or basil ointment so that it is widened.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And apparently if the orifices are wide, then you add sutures to their lips and leave the quantity in which there is added the clistery.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the orifice from which blood runs is raised above the area of the navel, then dry that place in a pus base where it is so that the blood does not run into it, for when the arm is constricted in the belly's depth, the flesh is generated in it.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it is not possible for you to dry the belly within the limits of the base pus according to what you want, then you pierce that member with the preparation with which the arm runs smoothly according to what you have on your body and is not kept by any cause of the blood.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And take consolidating medicines that are paused over the belly with water that you want to extend those over a drape.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And the drape should be of such a quantity as to make communication with all the belly; and approach the scissors to the right side of the belly' orifice, a very wide cut that the orifice is; and then extend over another drape with lion ointment according to the quantity of the cut, and pause it on top of it for a distant position from the belly' orifice so that it is removed from the arm' blood and does not obstruct the drape. It should be approached a few days later.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	May that which is over the belly' orifice, which remains closed all the time so that blood does not run into it and affects the arm.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And so you will know if the blood that runs from the arm is little or much, or is non-digested or digested.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And when you consider the location of that belly, if the patient feels pain there or not, and whether it is in a pus.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And when your medicine is prolonged in this way and you see the matter that is stuck to the belly' orifice has adhered or owned it, then you wash it off or change the drape after three days, and when you wash it off, then change the ointment.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	May that if the belly has adhered to it a subtle virus, then you do not despair of the possession of it, for healing belongs to it, for some men in whom the generation of flesh in the plagues takes place, and in those in whom it does not take place.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if the belly has adhered after three days and is the cause of prolonged possession, then you adjust to drying out medicines, and if those medicines are wet in their substance and power, then dry them with a syrup of daphnicum, when there is an excess of addition of salt.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the latter to be cleaned is that you take a syrup of daphnicum and dissolve it in rosin oil, and has it in its substance, and then applies it to it, and uses it.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And that is sufficient in this action when there is no arm, a syrup of daphnicum, honey when it is dried up inside that it is thickened, and use it; or that you take myrrh and aloes and mix them, and trisse all of them and powder them on the honey when it is cooked, and then apply it to the drape and tighten that one over the belly; and apply that honey which has dried up inside, and powder it over the drape and tighten that.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And some people give long-lasting aristology and cut of celestial lily (and it is lily of the sky) and flour of erys and centaurea, and use those simple or prepare them, mix them and strain them and powder them on the honey that has been mentioned; and use it.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the belly is prolonged and has not been cured with this treatment, then you know that corruption is in its beginning, and has already occurred in bones or in other hard members or to the joints; then you treat it with a fistic cure, yes when there is swelling.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	Of treatment of a paronychia and applied ointment and cutting and trimming of the nail and section.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Paronychia is a pustule that does not let go of the nail of the hand or foot, and it becomes hard on the other fingers, and when it is prolonged and its treatment is expensive, or it is a bad pustule, or it is corrupted, and the flesh rots, and the nail is corroded, and the nail's color changes to black.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And so when you have that water which I have mentioned in the division and do not rely on your treatment, then cover up all of the excess that is rotten from the nail, and then cauterize the wound with fire, for cauterizing the wound is beneficial in it.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	May that if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and those additions to the nail have already compromised the flesh at the base, and it begins to rot and corrode, and cover up that angle of the nail that you hit the flesh, and push that flesh up, and then pause over it that is left of the flesh with burning medicines that are corrosive so that it is completely closed; and then treat it with ointment.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	May that if corruption has already set in the bone, then you cut out that bone and extract it, for there is no cure but to let the bone rot.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if corruption and decay have set in the finger, then you cut it off in one of the fingers according to what is appropriate for that member, and then treat it with ointment.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	May that if the nail has percussion or injury, and if it has severe pain, then you begin to give the patient bloodletting, and then dry the nail with a transverse cut above it, and be careful that the cut does not reach the flesh under the nail, for you will provoke severe pain in the patient, and cause birth of excess blood in that place; and then treat that place with water.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	Here comes the first sentence to translate. Do not add any comments, like "here is the translation", just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And some of them are born in the root of the joint, or in the origin of certain nuts.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	But that which is born in certain nuts of the above-mentioned plant does not harm anyone; but that which is born in the joints is very harmful.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And as for those that are born with a tender flesh, the section is less painful; and it is because you cut them with a sharp blade from their root.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	But as for that which is born in the root of the joint, the cure is difficult; and so you should guard against its separation.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But as for that which is born in certain nuts, you should cut off its meat at the beginning with a round blade into the bone, and then you should hold it tightly between those blades, convenient to water, and then heal it within.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	But the solidification which takes place between certain parts of the body, whether by nature or by solidification from plague or from fire, or by similitude, so that it dries up; and then it is necessary to restore those parts to their natural shape.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And place between them a thin layer of lead in order that it may not be solidified too much; and separate them or place a small blade between them so that it may be solidified according to how you wish.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And if by similitude solidification takes place in certain nuts on the palm, then dry it up according to how it is prepared, and shape it according to the member's form.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	Of the separate parts, such as the fingers, there are four veins.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	And these same veins, wrapped around with thick fluids full of melancholy humors which come from the parts of the body, especially from the legs; and most of all in the legs of those who travel or work or carry burdens.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Then give to the patient a strong purge of black bile from time to time with a strong drink; and then let blood from the basilar vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	But the cure of them is according to two methods: the one is that they should be cut and then be drawn out the black humor; and the other method is that the vein should be lifted up and all should be extracted.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	But the cutting of them is according to this method: put the leg at first into water tail-up so that the gross humor may be resolved, which comes from the leg, and then tighten the bandage tightly on the part under a raised cushion within; and then cut the vein in one place, or in two, or in three by a wide incision, and then raise the black humor to the height of the leg's weight above the bandage; and then lower it again into the water, so that the quantity may be exhausted which you wish, and which is often enough, and whose power persists in the patient.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	Then take away that, and command him to abstain from black bile-generating foods.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And repeat the cure by phlebotomy when the veins are filled and the patient feels ill.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	But the raising of them is according to this method: if you cut the leg of the patient and dip it into water so that it swells up and the veins are inflated; or if you exercise it strongly by means of an exercise, since a bath is not at hand, within that member may be scarred.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And then cut the leg at one end of the vein by incision in the long or in the back; or at the lower end of the leg by cutting it off.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And then cut the leg with a knife and squeeze the vein out completely so that its appearance may be seen; and it is necessary to see that it turns black.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And so, if you extract it and then cut off the leg, you will have that white humor which is called cord.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And then put that at a distance from it so that it may be raised and may be taken away; and suspend it by an ounce of gold.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	And then cut another section close to that one by three cuts; and then squeeze the leg from the top of the vein so that it appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	And then raise that one and cut it from the back by a section near its end; and then extract it and raise it up so that it is extracted by the second section; and then extract it from the section which is above that.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And then place it so that you extract that one from the highest or lowest section of all the sections; and then cut it.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if you do not obey me in order to extract it and raise it up, then insert a double-edged needle into it tightly and pull it out; or take it away by the end of the leg with a bandage tightly around it; and turn your hand completely so that it may be extracted.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And keep in mind that if it is broken, then it will be difficult for you to raise that one; and it may come back to the patient through that wound.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when that one is completely taken away, then place it on the spot of the plague which is submerged in water and oil which is yellow and not yellow; and heal it within so that it may be healed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the wine has contracted without having any tortuosity with which it is wrapped up in the parts, and is not according to rightness according to how I have said; then cut that one completely on all sides of its tortuosity and of the spots where it is wrapped up, and then suspend that one by a knife within so that you can raise it completely.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And keep in mind that the section which you make should not be made on the vein or on the patient' blood; for it is difficult for you to raise that one; and use your prudence carefully.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	The shape of the incision which is dried up wine:
Forma de unci orp:	The shape of a golden knife:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not suitable for you to cut with such a knife or of such an acute point so that the vein may be injured; and it is of great flexibility like gold, because if it were too fine, it would injure the vein by its fineness; and it remains in a superfluous grossness thus far as I have said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	Of the extraction of the vein of the leg.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is generated in the legs in dry lands as the Arabs say, and in the arid lands of little moisture and in which there is neither grass nor shade.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And it is very strong when generated in other parts of the body outside the legs.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And its generation is of decomposition which comes from inside the body like snakes and worms and beetles and lice which are generated between the leg and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	And the sign of the coming of this disease is a violent inflammation of the vein; and then the place is swollen; and then the vein comes out from that swollen place which resembles the root of a plant.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And then, as you come to the end, cover that one piece of lead with which it is said that the weight of two dragons is on its feet.  (It should be noted) that this lead is suspended from the chest.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And as many times as there is a reason for it to be wrapped at its ends, wrap it in lead and then weigh it up.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if it is prolonged, then cut one part of the leg and wrap it up; and do not cut that one from which root it may come out, because if you cut it, it will be contracted and will enter into the flesh and will cause a pus and a sore at that place and a malignant ulceration.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	For that it seems necessary to remove him gradually and carefully, until he is completely extracted from the patient's body without causing any harm to the patient.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And of this vein, I have seen some men who are in their 20s and 30s, and already it has come to me that they should be treated with x palms and not more.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is scarred in the hour of its treatment, then insert the blade into the patient's navel and pierce that long way through the body, so that all that is in the matter is evacuated, and administer putrid medicine at the site for a few days; and then cure that with the cure of abscesses.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein sometimes causes sharp rashes, and mostly when it appears at the junction of the foot or in the foot itself, and comes out as a sharp hole, and is extracted from each hole slowly.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And therefore cure that one so well as we have said above, and at the same time administer medicine that is mentioned below.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	Of the section on diseases generated under the skin and called bovine disease.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This disease is called in some countries bovine disease because it causes a small worm to appear in the body and it creeps all over the body and dissolves the flesh, and shows itself clearly with the movement of the heart in member after member until it breaks the skin and comes out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And its generation is due to the putrefaction of certain humors, and thus worms, snakes, earthworms, and roundworms occur in the stomach.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is feared because of its malice, for when it goes into the body and rises to the head, and comes out through the mouth, then a sharp rash appears in it, and it destroys the tongue, and where it passes, worms appear.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And therefore, when you want to cure it and extract it, do not do it unless you have their movement and appearance at hand, and then find that one and tighten it above it and squeeze it tightly, and then dry it on it and extract it.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is immersed in the flesh and you do not see it, then pause a cauterization over the site where it lies, and the main cause that is feared is the corruption of the patient as we have said above.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	May you see that creature come out at the mouth, then tighten it above the cheek with a tight grip, and then dry it off, and extract it; and if the patient uses laxatives of the body to evacuate the bad humors, and keeps away from foods that cause putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	Of the section on disease in the neck.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This disease is called in our country "nafir", and it is a painful disease that is felt in some members, and then it changes from one member to another.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And you have already seen that second one as I recommended to you.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	You have called one sick woman to a village, and you saw her arms swelling and noticed a small inflammation in the vein of her arm, and for an hour, it went up slowly like living silver moving from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then he sat still at the site of pain and became stiff in the muscle, and then it relaxed for a full hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	Then it moved into the other arm from which it came.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	Then I was told to turn it over from side to side, as you saw; and I was very amazed by the change in it and by its speed from member to member.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	You have already seen that second one as I recommended to you, but I also saw the strange way in which it was moving its limbs, and I have seen even stranger ways in which it has changed members.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	But I did not see that in the woman.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And you did not think that it was air because the woman was old, with a few hearts and open veins, and in this way the wind is felt at her feeling.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	It is necessary that it does not appear according to this reverse cure in those who are delicious and have thin veins.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And if you want to heal it and the patient feels pain, do not appear in front of him as we have said above; then tighten it and dry it off where it is, and then stop that wind from moving, and cauterize the site.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	But if you do not see that it is a thin-hearted woman, then heal it with the extraction of the body and the water that it expels, and ingest the pills made from soap, sesame seeds, and similar things.
De extraccio de sagetas.	Of the extraction of arrows.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrows are different depending on the spices, and depending on the sites of the body where they are hit, because their difference is that some of them have large tips, small ones, concave ones, and round ones, and some are solid; and some of their shape has three angles, and those which are in the form of tongues.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And that second one according to the members and feet on which it hits is in two ways: because those members are principal concaved, such as the neck, heart, and chest, and lungs, and breasts, and bladder, and intestines, and their similars; and when you find that arrow in any of these members and tie your hair with death, which I recommend to you, then you avoid extracting that arrow from those, because it causes death in them, and when you do not appear those bad hair, and the arrow does not melt in the depth of the member, then extract it and heal the plague.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And the hair of the head is when it hits the arrow and goes through the bone, and comes out from the nape, which happens because of the violent pain, and dizziness, and loss of speech, and vomiting of blood, and then it becomes separated from its word, and is destroyed by rot, and a white moisture similar to pus comes from it, and remains of it in the flesh.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And therefore, if you appear to you these hair, then you abstain from treatment and from extracting the arrow, unless it is outside.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	But the arrow hits in the heart, so that it is close to the left side, and feels like it has stuck to a hard cause, and does not feel like a wound; and the movement of the arrow is similar to the movement of a pulse, and passes the black plague, and causes that coldness in the extremities, and a biting feeling, and syncope, and then if you know that death comes in two takes.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And the hair when the arrow has struck the chest, it is very likely to feel a spasm of plague, and the vessels that are close to the throat begin to burst, and the color of the patient changes, and he exhales great breath, and seeks fresh air.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the arrow hits the vein that is in the foot, and the pain then comes to the small sides, and makes a great sound with pain and a sigh, and all of the muscles do not feel good.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if the arrow hits in the stomach, then there is a great pain with an uncomfortable digestive disease.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if the arrow hits in the belly, and it is stuck there, then there is a breach of plague or bladder or intestines which are torn apart, and there is no hope for the extraction of the arrow from the belly.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the dart hits the bladder and urine comes out immediately, and it seems to him that there is some cause for it to come out immediately, and the pain in the patient is strong, then know that it is deadly.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	Nor the other members when it is face, neck, jaw, shoulders and adductors, and the spine and its assistant bones, and the hip bone, and the pelvis, and their like of the members, are saved according to the greatest dispositions when the dart does not hit a vein or an artery and is not a poisonous dart.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I will recommend to you that I have seen the essence of these darts, so that you know how to treat it well.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The cause is that, when a man hits a dart in the lacrimal of his eye on the root of his nose, and I extracted it from him from another part, I left his ear intact, and it was cured, and did not happen to his eye anything.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And I extracted another dart from a Jew which hit him in his ear, leaving the eyelid intact, and the dart was hidden, and it did not happen to him anything but a small bit attached to his lid, and it was a sharp dart of the Turks with a lion's head on it, which was not attached to his ears.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And then he is the Jew, and did not happen to his eye any bad accident.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And I extracted another dart from a Christian which fell on his jaw, and it was an Arabic dart, and that is the one which has ears; and then I hid it between two guides, and it had already submerged in his jaw; and then I extracted it carefully, and it healed the Christian.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And I extracted another dart from a man which hit him in his belly, and I thought he would die of it; and then, since it had been thirty days and did not change on him for any cause of its dispositions, I hid the dart and put it under it, and it was healed, and did not happen to him anything bad.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And I saw another man in whom a dart hit him on his back, and the plague was consolidated on him, and then he had eight years passed since then, and the dart hit him in the pelvis.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And I saw a woman hit by a dart in her belly, and the plague was consolidated inside of her, and did not change its dispositions in part, and the woman was not harmed at all in some of her natural operations.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And I saw another man who was hit by a dart in his face and the plague consolidated and broke the dart, not causing him much pain, but it looks like this.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And I extracted the dart from the prince of the king which hit him in his nostril and had already declined on the right side a little bit, and the whole dart was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And I was called to treat it immediately after three days.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then I turned the plague of the dart by a subtle attempt; and then I did not feel that; but he felt a punch in his right ear, and then he expected that that punch was from the end of the dart.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And I applied an ointment to the place with a soothing and digestive action, assuring myself that the place would turn red for me so that it appears to me the place where the dart hit, so that it heals on it.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And did not happen to the place any significant accident which the dart hit that place; and I continued applying ointment to it for many days and no accident happened; and the plague was consolidated in the meantime, and broke the nose of its own accord after a space of ten days until one day he felt the dart from his nose and gave me again.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then I applied to the plague an acute corrosive medicine for many days and no more happened until it was well; and by a trial, I tried that, and I turned the extreme end of the dart with a subtle, which was attached to its lid.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And I adjusted to the plague by that acute medicine until it appeared to me clearly the extreme end of the dart, and then passed from me again for a space of time within four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And then the plague became more serious, and I forced it out with pliers, and in the end of the chapter, I extracted it; and then I restored that plague.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And some doctors argued that the cartilage of his nose was not restored, and I restored it and the plague was consolidated, and healed the disease completely, and did not leave it in him for any cause.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I recommend to you the quality of extraction of some darts for which you pause here and that is not said, because the parts of this art and the definitions of that are not understood by me, since the definitions of those are not understood in that book.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the expert knows little about it; and on me that is presented what is absent; and the new operation and the new instruments are found by the descent of foreign causes when they happen.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	So then I say that darts are not fired from the members in which they are stuck, but according to two ways: either by the attraction of the place where it is inserted or by the opposite direction of the other party.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that dart which is fired by the place enters, or it is a sharp dart in the flesh, and it is thrown and shot out.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if you do not obey the hour in which it hits, then be aware that after a few days you will find meat around it, and that attraction of it and its exit is not clear.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	And seemingly if it is stuck in the bones and does not obey you to the hour of the hit, then leave that for a few days and return to the attraction and moisture every day, and it has already been shot out.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if you do not obey your hour of the hit after a few days, then be aware that you pierce the course of the dart in the whole bone of the entire part with a subtle journey, and then extract it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the dart is stuck in the bone of the head and has already broken one of the veins of the brain, and it appears in the disease that I have described, then abstain from extracting the dart and leave it for a few days; for if the dart pierces the spirit, then death is prolonged.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the dart is not stuck but only in the bones and does not break any vein, and it heals for a few days, and no accident happens to it, then you will find yourself attracted to the dart and to its exit.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	But if it is stuck and you do not obey to extract it, then you administer journeys around the course of the dart in that way as well, and then heal the place within which it is.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	But if the dart is stuck in its own place and it is painful, then you try that with a certain number of instruments suitable for attracting it; and if you feel that pain, then you shoot those at the end of the dart with pliers or another instrument convenient for attracting it.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot stand it because of the plague's constriction and its length, and there are neither bones nor nerves nor veins, then you will have to apply to the plague until it is larger and can be extracted by the dart.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if they are attached to the ears which have been injured, then release the flesh in which it is lodged from all sides by making use of all the tools you can; and invent yourself a way, if you cannot find one, of releasing the flesh in the injury to the ear and turning those parts inside out until they become soft.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in any place where it is, then use your hand to twist it with forceps from all sides until it softens; and carefully at the back so that the arrow does not break and that it can be extracted with difficulty by you and that extraction.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot manage that of your own hand, then leave it for a few days until the wounds heal that are in its path, and then repeat that procedure when it is relieved.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	Otherwise, if you have pain from the flow of blood, then administer the water that we spoke about in the first chapter for relief.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And keep your virtue of incision away from veins or nerves, or strings, and administer the tools to you as much as possible in order to avoid the arrow; and make water easy and calm and late and firm at will and remind you and advise you.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And so that the arrow is turned back in order for the patient to be arranged according to the figure according to which the position of the arrow in it should be determined, because it is more useful.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	Otherwise, if this is not possible for you, then administer the water that is possible for you by figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	Otherwise, those arrows that are shot from the opposite side, or which already hit one of the parts from outside, or make the tip of the arrow light by touching the part above the knuckle and turning it; then cut it off; and do so according to the amount in which the forceps grasp; and then throw it away, because it is made light by little.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	Otherwise, if it is stuck in the bone, then twist your hand according to the opposite direction in which the arrow enters the bone, and increase it inwardly, and then extract it.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	Otherwise, leave it for a few days, and then repeat that procedure until it is heated.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the head of the arrow is in that place, then push it towards the patient.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	Otherwise, if the head is fallen and you want to administer impact, then insert it, if it is deaf, a thick object so that it enters between the concave part of it and the arrow head; and push it towards the patient.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	Otherwise, if the arrow is concave, then push it with a strong object that enters into it, because the arrow is relieved by it.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the arrow is poisoned, then cover all the flesh in which it is located with vinegar, if you can, and then treat it with water that you consider necessary.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the arrow has entered into the foot, or into the belly, or into the bladder, or into the rib, and is near to touching it, so that you can touch it with your hand, then cut off that part, and keep away from cutting veins or nerves, and extract it; and if it hurts, then treat it until it heals.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Shape of forceps for arrows to be shot:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	Their ends of their beaks made with awl are formed with pliers when they grasp the arrow so that it does not slip.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And of these are formed small nuts, large, few and smaller, according to the quantity of the size of the arrow and its narrowness, and the width of the wound, and the contraction thereof.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	Shape of a thrusting concave end of this cavity with an awl in order for the arrow to be relieved inside it, and thrusting that deaf end:
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Shape of a deaf end thrusting:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	as well as a ray in order for the arrow to be relieved inside it and thrust towards that one.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	Of bloodletting from veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so .xxx., de las quals so en le cap .xvi., so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins of bloodletting from which usual bleeding occurs: of those in the head: And of these are found two pulsating veins that run to the ears, saying "ah"; two herbs that grow in the middle of the head; and two veins that run through the two temples from the front, and a vein at the top of the forehead, and a vein at the tip of the nose; and two guides that run along the cheekbones; and two veins that are on the upper lip; and two veins that are on the lower lip; and - these are the veins that are called "alglic" -; and two veins that run along the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so .v.; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	Otherwise, the veins to be bloodlet from the arms are: 5. And of these is a cerebral vein, and it should be taken from the wild horse; and the people call it "the vein of the head," and deaf, and it is a migrain vein, and it consists of one ramification from the basilic, and another ramification from the cerebral; and they name that one "all-over," and they call those ones the vulgar "vein of the belly"; and the veins of the arms, and it is paused over the fire, and it is that which is bloodlet from, and it is that which appears above the pussy by a clear sign; and the save, and it is the vein that runs between the little auricular and the smallest one, and so on.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And in the foot and the chest are three veins; the one of those is that which goes from the back side of the wild horse; and the second is a sciatic vein, and its place is from the front side of the domestic horse; and there is a vein on the chest similar to those.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The appearance of veins that run along the ears is due to the smallness of the animal, and the emigration and the swelling of the head in ancient times was caused by the bad breath and ulcers of the head.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of feeling those veins is according to your advice: it should be rasied up the hair of the patient, and rubbed in a good way at the back of the head in the place of both veins so that they are touched by the comb with a wide edge; then tie the hair of the patient with a knot in order for them not to appear; and if you want to feel those veins with your fingers, and if you feel the pulse of those with your fingers, here is the pulse.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Here comes the first sentence to translate. Do not add any comments, like "here is the translation", just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	Then raise your hand up to the vein and the joint until you reach the top, and cut the vein with a sharp blade.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And the length of the cut is the amount of two fingers or less from water; and make a loop with the thread as large as you want it.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then tighten the knot and leave it there to heal.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And already, at the beginning of this book, the cuts and their cauterization have been described.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	Of the two veins that are cut with bloodletting - the ancient emigre, the evil and the frequent headaches and acute effluents that flow into the vessels.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of bloodletting those is according to what I recommend to you: tighten the patient's leg with a knot until the two veins appear at the pulse, and then try it yourself.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	Then raise the joint open to the vein at the top with a sharp knife, and insert the bloodletting into it, and raise the vein up; and cut those same with a sharp blade in the two veins; and run off the blood according to the amount of your need.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then remove the cord from around the patient' leg, and place it on the vein for an hour, and then put a knot and tighten it sharply, and leave that there to heal.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And already, at the beginning of this book, their memory has been described, and their cuts, and their cauterization.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And therefore, the bloodletting of the vein in the forehead is to be done with bloodletting on the cephalic artery for ancient headaches and sore eyes and emigre, rigor, and putrid ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of bloodletting for him is according to what I recommend to you; but if the patient tightens his leg with a knot until the vein appears; and take this instrument which is called a scissor, of which this form is:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then place the point of the scissors eminent at the top of the vein and strike it sharply with a hammer or in another way to make it run off according to the amount you want; then remove the hole from around the patient' leg, and leave that there to heal.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	And some have performed bloodletting laterally, but it is not known that bloodletting is of extreme importance in this way as in the others; for the bone is hard and strong, and would break a small bloodletting.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	Of the two veins that are cut with bloodletting - the lacrimal veins of two eyes for the skin of the eye for rigor and inflammation in the eyes, and to ancient headaches of the face.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	And the quality of bloodletting is that the patient tightens his leg with a knot, and then bloodlet it; and you stand on top of it.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And the bloodletting is done according to the transverse length at a little amount, because there is no flesh in that place; and if the bloodletting is subtle, the extreme end of it is broken.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Then let the blood run as much as you need it; and place those knots on them, and tighten them with a hammer, and then remove those.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	Of the bloodletting of the nose vein is associated with acute fever and violent dizziness, and ancient headaches and emigre and rigor that occur in the face, and mainly when it is old.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of bloodletting for him is that the patient tightens his leg with a knot, and then take the nose with your left hand; and take a subtle bloodletting long, and place it in its usual place on the top of the nose according to the direction, because the vein does not appear here, and because the blood begins to flow after a while.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	And then remove your hand from the bloodletting little by little and let the blood run according to your need; and then tie that with a knot, because it is restored slightly.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	Of the bloodletting of two veins is to be done with a sharp knot, and at the beginning of leprosy and the start of motus headaches and bad diseases and corrosive ulcers; and to heal them.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And the quality of bloodletting for them is that the patient tightens each leg with a knot in his leg; and place the doctor on top of the patient' head, and let the patient lie on a bed.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	Then bloodlet the vein long with a large bloodletting little by little; and then let off blood according to the season or water as much as needed it; and then do the same for the other vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	Then remove the knot and tighten both legs with a tight grip so that the patient is not choked, and leave them inside until the disease is healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	Of the bloodletting of those veins is to cure the diseases of the mouth  - small pimples and pus, and the corruption of the gums and bad ulcers and cracks, and the bad ulcers that are in the nose and in the rest of it.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	And the quality of bloodletting for them is that you wash the patient' face in front of you, and tighten his leg with a knot, and then turn his lips and look at two veins of which one is on the right side of the lip and the other is on the left; and the demonstration of each is by its blackness, and more so because those veins are small black ones; and then cut each with a sharp blade.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	Then if you are in doubt, leave it to be cut by a sharp blade; and then determine which is the most prominent of those, and which is the pus that comes out of them.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	Then make the shape of the two veins in his lips.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	Of course, it is better to cut both veins that are on the lips with bloodletting.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	Of the two veins that are cut on the tongue, the bloodletting of the cephalic artery is to cure the lockjaw that is in the throat, and the headache of the uvula, and the headaches of the mouth.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And the quality of bloodletting for them is that you place your hand between his two legs in front of the sun, and lift his tongue up, and look at his tongue from both sides, and the color of each is turning to blackness.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	Then bloodlet each one; and be careful not to take your hand off those veins, because they are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And your veins that are bloodlet in the neck are the ones that run in all men, and the bloodletting of them is done according to two ways, or put a knot on the bloodletting long, or cut it with a sharp knife, and then see if it stops; and this is the way:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	This one is that you bring to section, and of those are special pieces and subtle according to the width of the veins and according to the tightness of them.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Shape of bloodletting:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	Let them lie on their backs sometimes and make it easier to open the concave veins that are full of thick blood and turn those that contain large amounts of black blood.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	This is the method for performing an olive-pod draining procedure:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And this type of bleeding is of little depth and subtle in its extremities; it is suitable for draining veins that contain subtle amounts of yellow blood.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	It is the improvement of the draining of the basilic vein, which is one of three veins: it removes the bad blood that comes from the groin and goes up to the neck, and from there that affects the feet and the abdomen.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And let the flubotomy surgeon, when performing that procedure, be careful and keep it in mind, because there is an artery there, and if he makes a mistake or adjusts the puncture for flubotomy, he will cut that artery and cause blood to flow; so it is necessary that he does not make a mistake when puncturing for flubotomy, otherwise he will cut it with a sharp instrument.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the basilic does not appear clearly, then let him know that he should lay it down and move to the other one, or look for a branch; or perform flubotomy at the end of the arm, since that is clear, and do so with a sharp instrument while lying on their back sometimes.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	And if you want to perform the flubotomy of that arm, then let him know that he should put his hand forward and touch the area where he knows the location of the wrist, and place it on it; then take the arm and cut the vein with a sharp instrument while lying on their back sometimes, as mentioned above; and be careful not to hit the percussion for a short distance in that area.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	And when you stretch it with strength, blow in the area that you have covered with your hand; then that inflation is an inflammation of the artery, and therefore let it go.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if the blood flows like a child’s breath during flubotomy as mentioned above, then know that it is the blood of the artery; and let him rest his hand on that area for a long time; and then remove his hand, and if the blood stops flowing, as it is seen to have stopped, then let him stretch the arm and leave it like that.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And protect the patient from the wetness of the air; and be careful with him, and do not harm him for a few days until he is healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	And if the blood does not stop flowing, and it is necessary to go to a place where medicine is available; then cut that artery if it appears to you; because its end is contracted, and the blood has stopped; or take a scorta of castor oil, pour it on, and take one-half of it, and stretch it over the location of the vein that has narrowed while stretching it with a string and powder inside for another day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And then if the blood has stopped flowing, it is good; and if not, then heal him with water from which the memory of the location of the powder that stops the flow of blood begins.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And the difficulty of stopping the blood from flowing is great in such arrangements due to the small location of the pulse and the possibility of stretching the arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	And from the black vein, the improvement of draining the blood that comes from the head and goes to the body is good; because it is made up of branches of the basilic and cephalica veins, as mentioned above.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And let the flubotomy surgeon be careful when performing flubotomy on that arm, because it is a nerve; and if he makes a mistake in puncturing for flubotomy and damages the nerve, he will cause stupor, and its healing is difficult, and it does not heal completely unless it is shown to someone else; and this nerve appears clearly with the feeling; and if it is overlooked by some people, and it is subtle and does not show itself, then let him stop flubotomizing at that part where he punctures for flubotomy while lying on their back sometimes, and avoid the nerve in front of his shield.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if the vein is between two nerves, then you cut the vein in its length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The improvement of draining the cephalic vein is that it draws blood from the head and prevents bad blood from the ears.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	In this particular case, if you want to perform the flubotomy of this vein by puncturing like olive or by piercing; because it is the safest of all veins, as it does not contain nerves or arteries.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	However, it is necessary for you to know that during flubotomy you do not punch the top of the ear, but look for the area closest to it, and do not hit it with a sharp instrument until the first punch while performing flubotomy a few times.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	However, it is difficult to treat a person if he does not get an injection during the first punch, but you do not notice that an injection has been made.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	This is the quality of flubotomy of that arm and its accidents; in which you must consider their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first of these is that you must know that flubotomy should not be administered unless it is done with the preservation of health and in the hope of its recovery, and that it be performed at the beginning of spring, summer, or autumn; and towards winter, it should be stopped when there are signs of accumulation.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And flubotomy should be performed on the third day or at the earliest on the first day, from three hours after dawn.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	The flubotomy that is administered should be done at a convenient and necessary time, whether it is a new day or not; throughout the day and all the time.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And if you do not want to be flubotomized until the age of twelve years, and women should not be flubotomized before they are seven years old; and those who have already passed sixty years should not be flubotomized.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And if someone wants to be flubotomized by any method, he should mark his Budels in advance of the flubotomy with a leather rope, if there is a cut that has been held, so that the veins do not drain excess fluid during the flubotomy of the Budels, which are useless, and do not affect the main members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And do not flubotomize the patients who have a fever, nor those who are drunk or sick; and do not flubotomize those who vomit, or have abdominal pain, or have many children or work, or stay up late, or for any other reason that destroys their strength; or if they are in a state of weakness, or if they are weak-willed, or if they lack willpower.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And consider the subtle qualities of the air in advance if the blood is thick, and the food and drinks, and the medicines if it can be to the patient's benefit.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And enter the bath if there is no reason to prohibit it, or exercise for any exercise that makes the blood thin.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And stop flubotomizing on the feet of the day; it is at three o'clock in the afternoon, as mentioned above.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And let the feet of that arm be preserved on that day from all kinds of animal accidents, such as anger, fear, and pain; and from all unnecessary work and children, and resembling their appearance.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And on the same day, let the causes of these things be present in the use of the air that is common to all people, with its aromas and scents, and with balms and resembling them according to the amount of possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	Then follow the fluiton on a cushion that has been placed or that it is the same as the cushion of that one that should be used for fluiton.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	Then he will remove the patient's arm and rub it with the fluiton two or three times; then he will tighten the joint with a strap and wrap that one with two bands.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And if the constriction is early on, because the constriction when it is not tight or when the constriction is too much, then it is forbidden to wash the leg; or if it is very soft and it is forbidden to touch the leg with a cloth.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	Then follow the constriction, and if that one who should be used for fluiton rubs his hands together between them so that the veins are swollen and appear to the touch.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	Then he will rub his fluiton with a little oil of its own; and then place his right hand on the patient' right vein where he wants to perform the procedure, pause at that point so that the blood flows a little, and then stops because from those veins comes the most noise when they are squeezed; and if he stops, the fluiton does not hurt him, and if it hurts him, it is because he stopped too late.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	So then, when the fluiton stops and is tensed in all these causes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	Then stop the fluiton, maybe if the vein is in a crease, then do not stop; but if not, return to another crease a little away from that place or on top of it, if the place does not have a fold.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the place is inflamed or the patient' legs are swollen, then leave it alone for a day or two and do not tighten the joint because it will cause pain; nor wash it with water.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	Then repeat the fluiton if he tolerates it.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the feeling is small and subtle and you fear that it will not hurt as much as you want, then repeat the fluiton in that same place again, but adjust a little in the sensation, and do so gently before the place is inflamed, because the place is inflamed when it is inflamed for most men it takes very little to make them feel pain.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	But if that one has already been inflamed, then do not repeat on it, because there is no excuse for you to do so; and pause over some part of the foot's joint where oil can be seen because it makes the body feel relief.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And that is better in this place than oil or any other oil.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	And it seems that administering oil in any part of the procedure has to be avoided because it is forbidden to tighten the joint of the leg and to put tar and sage on it when you stop from one of those places because the leg is swollen and turns red when tightened.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if in the place of the fluiton is caused a great inflammation, because it is caused by creases and mainly at that one which bleeds but not that one which is swollen or has an inflammation on its surface, and then stop and pause over the inflamed part with a sponge soaked in salt water and slightly burned, and tighten it for an hour because it dissolves.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	Then when he makes water, follow the vein that comes out of the leg with a stream of water or another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if it remains in that place for several days some black or green, then do not wash it with water; and if you want to, pause over some part of the foot' joint where you can put aloes and myrrh dissolved, or aniseed and calamus or something similar.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	And so that is what happens in the procedure for the foot' joints: some swellings and nodules, which are called gout, can be caused by the basilica.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And so follow your hand over that place and if you feel any softness, then pause with your hand on that part where the soft feeling is felt, then that eminence is evil and bad; and then keep your hand off that part, because it will hurt a lot to pour water from the artery of the leg.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And make a paste out of water in which you tighten it and then treat that part with another treatment until it is healed.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	Then follow the leg out of the patient' body according to the quantity of its virtue and according to the color prevailing on it above the leg according to what appears.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	Because if the leg is black, then leave it alone until it rots and if you want to, if it is swollen, then leave it alone until it becomes soft and if it is hot, then leave it alone until it cools down.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And if that one is full and hard and needs to be extracted from the leg in a crease, then the procedure of taking the vein and the fluiton should be performed slowly.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And if that one is swollen, then do the opposite of what has been said, and if it needs to be extracted from several creases, then perform the procedure in a careful manner because it is very delicate.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	And the best thing for performing the vein procedure is to make a transverse cut, not a puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	And this way of performing the procedure saves the leg from gout and nerve damage, and it is more salutary and effective than the procedure according to its length and depth.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And at which time the fainting is usually caused by the procedure, and if you want to, before performing the procedure, put a little water of milk or some simple syrup on a sponge and burn it slightly; and then extract from the leg in three creases or four.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if the body is cold and stiff, then put a little water in front of the procedure to soften it with oil of myrrh or with oil of roses or with other aromatic oils; or with scented oil mixed with spices like cinnamon, ginger and nutmeg and something similar.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if the fainting is caused by the procedure, and it is a cause of the leg's blood flowing out, then follow the previous instructions about making water to soften the body before the procedure with scented oil mixed with almonds, and make your feet wet with it as well.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use the other causes we have mentioned in the chapter on fainting due to evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And if you want to treat your arms and dissolve the leg' problem according to the second cause, then follow the procedure for making water to soften the body with scented oil mixed with almonds, and make it flow out little by little, day after day, according to its quantity of virtue.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	But if you want to treat your arms and get rid of the leg' problem according to the second cause, and your body is strong, then follow the procedure for making water to soften the body with aromatic oil mixed with almonds, and make it flow out after seven or nine hours from the first procedure.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	But if you want to send the leg away from your body in the opposite direction of the joint where it hurts and it remains so on the third day, then follow the procedure for making water to soften the body with scented oil mixed with almonds, and make it flow out after three days.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	And if that leg is swollen and hot and it hurts a lot because it causes fainting, then follow the leg out of the patient' body where it hurts most and tighten it very much so that it does not hurt him anymore; and then stop the fluiton because if it hurts someone it will be bad for them to die in a place instead of fainting.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And if you want to treat your arms and get rid of the problem according to the third cause, and it is already closed because the vein has been cut off and it is difficult to get the leg out of the leg, then press hard over that part with vehemence and extend it a little, because water is too bad for you.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Here is the translation of the text:
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein is bloated, then leave it alone and don't touch it until the swelling goes down.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if necessity compels you to evacuate the blood with a second application, and it is no excuse, then apply it to that place or in another part of the body in some other vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the vein called "the bracelet of the arm" is to be punctured in a location other than the fold or crease, as it is composed of those veins.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	The quality of the bloodletting is that the patient's hand goes into cold water immediately after, so that it does not swell and so that the vein appears clearly.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	Then tighten it gently with a strap around the hand above or below the place where the vein appears, and apply bloodletting according to the small transverse line, not longitudinally or along its length.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And then the opening is large and your bloodletting is done from the joint of the hand a little way up.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if the flow of blood must be stopped, then you repeat the hand in cold water and leave the blood to run into the water until you satisfy your need.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	Maybe if you are in the summer season, then you are excused from repeating the hand in cold water, but the fast is kept in cold water during winter.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And the bloodletting from this vein is safer than that of any other vein, because it does not contain a pulsating vein or nerve.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And the bloodletting from the right wrist is associated with the symptoms of the stomach.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of the bloodletting is that you tighten the hand gently or with your own hand, as it was placed in cold water, so that the vein swells and becomes clearly visible; then apply bloodletting according to a small transverse line, not longitudinally or along its length, and if you cut that vein from all sides, you will not see the blood come out.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And remember that you do not finish the hand with bloodletting, because it has nerves that are exposed and without protection of flesh.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	Then repeat the hand in cold water and let the blood run into that place, because if you do not repeat the hand in cold water, the blood will clot in the vein's opening, and it will stop flowing.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And when the blood is drawn according to the quantity of necessity, then place your hand over olive and salt oil so that it does not harden completely; and apparently cover all parts of it evenly.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	Maybe the refreshment of bloodletting from the left wrist is that it is associated with the symptoms of the body.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	Do the same thing for bloodletting on this side as you did for the other side.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And the benefit of bloodletting from the saphenous vein is to the symptoms that are in the legs, as well as to the mother's symptoms, and the retention of menstruation, and the similar symptoms of rashes and sores on thighs and legs, and their similarity to the symptoms of old wounds.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	And the quality of bloodletting is that the patient puts his hand in cold water and makes a friction on it until the veins appear; then place your hand over the joint of the arm with a bandage; and the place where the vein appears cut it slightly, and from there it branches out on the surface of the arm.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And so bloodletting is done most widely and away from the edge of the skin, because it is better and safer to do so, as it is more pleasant and cleaner.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you bloodlet from the surface of the arm, then you protect yourself from the nerves that are exposed on the surface of the arm, and apply bloodletting according to the small transverse line, as though you were cutting it with a knife.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And it is safe.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	Maybe if the blood must not be seen, then you repeat the arm in cold water and let the blood run into that place before it is drawn out.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the bloodletting instrument makes a mistake in the first attempt, then repeat it slightly on the surface, because the place is safe; and do not worry about it hurting, but protect yourself from the nerves as we have said above.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And similarly bloodletting is done from the other leg in a similar way to this one.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And from the sciatic vein, the place we have mentioned is away from the edge of the hip bone.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And the benefit of bloodletting from this leg is that it helps with pain in the hips when done during a fever.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the quality of bloodletting is that the patient goes into a bath, and quickly and firmly tighten his belt from the bottom of the hips up to four inches above it with a long thin strap, because it does not appear clearly unless done so.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And when it appears, then you apply bloodletting with a second application of the same tool that was used for the first application and in the same way, because it is better; or cut that vein from all sides, because the place is safe.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And it is done in men of mild temperament; and if that vein does not appear clearly, then apply bloodletting to any part of the leg, and this is what appears at the top of the foot next to the ear lobe and the ring finger.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And protect yourself from the nerves, and let the blood run out in the amount you want.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	Then remove the bandage and tighten the place where the bloodletting was done, because it is easier to heal it tightly.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Of windiness and of the qualities of using those.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Of windiness: from corns, or from eczema, or from veils.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	And windiness is done in two ways: one is bloodletting and removal of blood, and the other is bloodletting with the skin being scraped off.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this windiness that is done by scraping is done in two ways, because it is either done with fire or without fire.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And the places where windiness is administered by bloodletting and removal of blood are twelve parts of the body, the first being the crown, and the last being the base of the neck; and the middle part between them; and the lower lip on the left side of the jaw, and the upper lip on the right side; and the two spatulas; and the alohosts, which are above the collarbone; and the two chins; and the two cheeks.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	And windiness does not remove blood from the main veins, but it removes it from small veins in the flesh, and for this reason it is done by bloodletting; nor does it bring about a change in the quality of the body when done by fire, or without fire, in order to relieve symptoms.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	Maybe if necessity compels you to apply windiness for a disease or continuously, then apply it at the beginning of the meal and at the end of it, and in the middle part as well; and in any place that is convenient.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	And the cause of this is because men in whom the blood multiplies within themselves until they are unable to remove it by windiness and they lose their head and sense, and it affects their neck and face; and their eye sockets become dark and dull; and their tongues are sticky with blood; and their sleep increases; and they spit blood; and their sleep becomes restless and disturbed, and their faces are sad and gloomy.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And if at any time for one of those reasons, and particularly if it is in the third or middle part of the month, then order that ventilation be done before it has passed two or three hours.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	The relief of the neck's ventilation is when that weight comes to the head and goes down the throat; but above all, it is necessary to evacuate everything from the body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	This ventilation is in the place of phlebotomy of the cephalic.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	It is not good to use it on those who are inflamed or in whom there is catarrh, because it causes great pain.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And above all, do not use it on the old, and in those heads in which there are ulcers.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	But to that who is under it continuously, there is relief; and above all, you order the ventilator that he pause his hand for a little while from the ventilation at the patient's legs, fearing the generation of oblivion.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	But ventilation of alcohol is in the place of phlebotomy of the dark vein and of the bazilian: and above all, it gives to asthma, and to the constriction of breath and to the breaking of the instrument of breath, and to cough, and to swelling.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And if it is stopped with alcohol a little while, because if it is paused from the sides, it generates weakness in the body and in the stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And the ventilation of alcohol gives pain in the head and blindness, emigration, pre-focus, and pain in the roots of the teeth; and it is in the place of phlebotomy of the bazilian.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And if you order the ventilator that he does not press his hand on the sacrifice for him to not cut the artery and cause blood flow.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And ventilation of the sides gives alcohol in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and mockery of the diseases that are in the mouth, and it is in the place of phlebotomy of elsewhere which is not in the two lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	But ventilation that is made on the two spatulas gives caphutan, which is done by the filling of quality.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And ventilation of the two inner sides of the teeth gives youth from phlebotomy of three veins, for it is of the bazilian, dark and cephalic; because those veins are drawn with more blood than those of the flesh, and these smaller veins than the others within that they arrive at the attraction to the three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And you order the ventilator that he does not go forward in the sacrifice, for the place is naked of flesh, and leaves them his nerves and arteries.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	It is a ventilation to the which is ventilated on the buttocks and gives to hemorrhoids of the buttocks and to ulcers from the sides.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And if you order the ventilator that it is great ventilation, and that it is of arnica, for the place deserves a strong section; and strong goes with subtle ventilation and does not go forward in the sacrifice for the sacrifice.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	But small ventilation of the legs with manifest caution, for they attract the blood from all over the body, and give old pains of the chest and of the mother, and of the bladder; and they provoke menstruation, and give both or urination; and it is in the place of phlebotomy of two veins, and of a horse-biting, and of two knots.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	But they leave the whole body disfigured and cause fainting in men.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And of the ventilation of horse-biting, its advantage is to the advantage of ventilation of two legs.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	And the quality of the position of the ventilations is that you pause the ventilation at the beginning and let it go through a little water in advance, and do not prolong the position of the ventilations, but rather pause them gently, and leave them carefully, and let the humors come to their place by arrival after.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not stop it repeatedly and continue inside that you see the place become red and swell and that the rigor of the blood appears.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	Then order sacrifice and repeat the little water little by little, and consider carefully the position of the bodies.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	For that man who is of tender flesh of rabbits, you order him to sacrifice one time and not more, so that the place is not ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And order the ventilator to increase the sacrifice a little, and make it easily.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if the blood is thick, then order two sacrifices; for in the first sacrifice it opens the way of subtilization to the blood and to its liquidity.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	But in the second to the acquired scrutinizing of the extraction of the thick blood.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the blood is ferment, then order sacrifice the third time so that it obtains the last one.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	Finally, when we want to extract the little blood little by little or a little, it is enough to us one sacrifice.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we want to extract from one blood, sacrifice by the abundant sacrifice; and if we know that the blood is thick, then order abundant sacrifice.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	The term of sacrifice in which is the depth of the cut only.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if the flesh of that person is thick, hard, dark, and the pores are small; then the places of ventilation are gentle, open, and resolute; if it is in summer, then such oil as aloe or violet, or tiny flowers, or butter's milk; and if it is winter, then olive oil, or lavender, or chamomile, or garlic, and to those which smell.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the superfluity is thick, frothy, then the oil is violet, or myrrh, or aloe, or aniseed, and to their scents.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	But if the ventilator has small pores of tender flesh, then it is forbidden to use oil, and that the places of ventilation are close with strong water or with fresh water of salt or with milk of butter, and to those which smell.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And if the blood is of a moist nature, then wash your ventilations with wine or with water of mirth and sumach, and similar to those.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And if the superfluities are thick, then wash your ventilations with wine of old or with water of fennel, which is marjoram, or aniseed, or chamomile, and to their scents.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And if the ventilation is kept forward of a bath; after it has been given to the person who is about to be bathed within an hour or two, and if he sleeps close to the ventilation.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What is necessary for him to be ruled by the ventilator before ventilation.
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	Consider at the beginning: then if the ventilator or the one who will phlebotomize is coleric and ventilates on the head with inflammation, then order that it be done with cold water, and with a little vinegar and lettuces, and dry bread, and ale, and to their scents.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And pause your meals such as peas, and meat of lambs, and prepared foods with herbs, and to those which smell.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And if the complex is frothy, then order to drink sweet water or water of almond with a little bit of sumac, and that it is commanded that he use little water and eating, and pause your meals of peas and herbs, and wine between vine and noonday; and that it be commanded that he eat meat in the afternoon and evening, and pause drinking and eating.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And when it is cold or a surgical procedure is performed, drink more water than food.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And if it is given in drink to some men a kind of medicine called 'tyriaca' or 'alpharac', or musc, or alcelta before surgery or before a procedure, so that the main limbs are comfortable and the wound is healed; and do not let them cut their skin.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	Then the cuts that are made should be stopped, and on the foot, and on the hernia, and on the navel, in the places of the joints, because these members do not suffer from cutting.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And do not want it on them but to attract the pain of a member, and thus stop the wound when cutting the mamilla in the malautia of the flux of the wound of the member of the nars; and use that so that the wound is dissolved, and so stops the wound because it heals with wounds.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And it is stopped on the chest when it happens to them in their illness or pox, because by virtue of its strong attraction, it lightens their pain and removes the pox from its place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And it seems to me that when it is stopped on the foot and the hernia, there should be a wind-stopping in those who are imprisoned by them.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	And these winds are administered with juice alone, and some are administered with fire.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And some are filled with boiling water in the malautias of the hernia.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And water is used to fill the wound with a greater volume; it is either hot water or water in which herbs have been boiled, suitable for drinking.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Form of wound administered with fire: it is the width of the orifice that we have formed; and the quantity of the medicine should be half a palm; and in the middle of it, in the place where it is in the circuit, the most part, the tract should be small according to the quantity that enters it a needle.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	It is made of roasted roe or citron, of large margins, lion, bull and boar, so that it does not harm the member due to its position on it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And in the middle of it, a transverse stick of roe or iron is placed, where it is stopped when lit by fire.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And this wound should be much greater than that which we have mentioned above; and the smaller one, less according to the malautias and the state of that person who uses it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the winds of old men and exhausted people are different from those of young people and large-boned people.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the quality of stopping this wound with fire on the member is that it extends the hand to the fire of wood properly in front of a small candle of wax, and stops it in the middle of the transverse stick in the middle place of the wound, so that the fire may be kindled by the wind blowing through the hole.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And it is stopped on the member of the patient, and it is placed over the tract that we have said, until when we have wound up the wound, but not so much as to hold the thread and cause the vapor to rise from that tract; then the wound is closed in a moment.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And light the fire according to its way, and do so again if you do not like this one.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	Then in the wound that is administered with a poultice, with water, and it is stopped on the member only when it is filled with water, and it is stopped over the member alone.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is the way to do it: And this wound, how great it is, so much the better, so that it receives a large quantity of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Chapter 77.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Sanguineous wounds are not administered in motz members, but in members where it is impossible to place wind-stops because of their smallness; or, as it seems to them, by the nose and mouth when they are naked.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those which you have found is that they are in the clean water of pox-riddled places.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And they should be laid down in the evening and rinsed twice in clean water before they become hungry, and so that no harm is done to their navel; and they are emptied out of the body at the beginning of surgery and blood-letting, and are stopped over it.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when it is stopped, it is filled again.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if it is possible to take juice from the place where the wound is, it should be preserved in the bottle.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	Then, if not, wash the place with vinegar and prepare water; and have it boiled and pressed.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the wound is prolonged in the body of the member, and the blood remains, then dip a cloth in cold water, and stop it over; until the residue has been washed away.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the wound multiplies, then sprinkle on it vitriol that is trised, or fry and seemly to it for stinging causes; until the wound has dried up; or stop it over the place where there are many beans of eggs, and they should be laid down before the beans adhere to the place; and the wound is dried up.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And when necessary, a second or third application of blood-letting, whenever possible, changing those used.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if blood-letting is forbidden by suspension, then wash the place with fresh blood or a needle placed in the places where it hurts, and stop it over; because these when they feel pain, so do those who have stopped them, for a moment only.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want to make it fall off, sprinkle on those a little dried aloe that is trised, or salt, or ash; and soon after.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Thus begins the process of healing the third part: of restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is necessary in the art of medicine; it is the restoration of a fracture and an accident of displacement in bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Or, son, know that this chapter is full of foolishness, and vulgar people; and those who at any time did not look at the freed ones of the Ancient books or read a letter from them.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason it is written that the way of the sciences of our land is hidden from us; and I have not forgotten any time for reading all of them, and I have studied their understanding very much, until I derived the science from them.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And it has directed me to experiment and study in the length of my life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have already described in this chapter all that concerns my science and on which my experiment passed; because it has directed me to open a new way for you, taking away from myself the trouble of elongation; and it opens a new way at the end of opening; and demonstrates in it by adding a declaration, as it did in two preceding chapters.
Capitol primier.	Chapter 1.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	First Chapter: On the Collection of Broken Bones, which, before we begin to comment on the members that are fractured and different from each other, is a necessary premise.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	So therefore say I in the proem of this chapter: "Let the words of this chapter be known; and let the chapters be understood by those who are skilled in this noble art, and stand firmly on the truth of them; so may you be, and these that follow you, learned in this art."
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And therefore I say that when a fracture or dislocation or twisting or grounding occurs, cover yourself from the beginning with the flail or break it, or any combination of the two, if no one prohibits you for some cause, there is a defeat of virtue, or this is the one in which it happens, or he is old and decrepit, or it is a time of violent heat, or of violent rain.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	Then let it be content with its own food of herbs and meat of birds and crabs; and forbid thick meats and filling yourself with food and all food that fills the veins with blood, except that you are certain of a cold cautery, and if you do not fear effusion of matter into the member.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	Then return the patient to their first position, where they usually rest.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And therefore, when the broken bone begins to be restored, cover it with nutritious food of dry and heavy and thick substance, and with soup made from flour mixed with water, and with roots, and with leaves, and with seeds, and with nuts, and with fresh meat, and with strong and similar foods, and in this regime a coagulatin
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	You know that broken bones in men who are young and in decrepit people cannot be continued and consolidated according to their nature by the drying out of the limbs.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they are consolidated and continued according to their nature at all times by the drying out of those limbs, and they are continued and consolidated which are of them in the end of the youth, as with the bones of small children.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	But nature adjusts and connects on the broken bone from the beginning any apparent cause of glut in which there is thickness that adheres and strengthens it within which are joined together within which comes the end of strength and firmness, as with fire at the beginning, so that no one prohibits such from its works.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason it is necessary that you pause the patient's food, foods in which there is gravity and viscosity and thickness, as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	There is a diversity of fractures according to the diversity of the limb.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And you know that the types of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of the limbs, as a fracture of the hip bone is different from a fracture of the head bone; and a fracture of the foot bone is different from a fracture of the leg bone; and similar, all the other members are diverse among themselves.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And I remember all the types of fractures, separated in a separate chapter from the other.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	There is a diversity of fractures within itself.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And the types of fractures of the bone within itself are diverse; for one is made a curved fracture and another that happens in its stars; and some are made according to the length of the bone: and these are the fractures of the skull and the eyelids and the additions, and those from which they do not proceed, as when it is fractured in the pain when it is prepared to write, and the fracture occurs with a plague and disruption in the head, and the fracture is a small fissure.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And all these species are made by nature in the restoration of him, so that it will be remembered in its place.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	There is a sign of a fracture of the bone.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And this is how a fracture of the bone is recognized: it is tortuosity, and from it the eminence and appearance that comes to the sense, and not by it when you press it with your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And therefore, when it is not in the apparent tortuosity place or is not made, and the patient does not have great pain when you touch the bone with movement, then it is not here a fracture.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	When it is possible that it is tortuosity or a small fracture, then do not cover it with your hand and with pressure from all; when you pause the medicines of which you have reminder; and let it be tight by subtle stricture.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And you know that the place when it is arched and does not split into two or another that happens in its satagia, as if it is removed from all of its comparison, then you begin your hour to correct it while it happens to you an aposteme cautery.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if it happens to you an aposteme cautery, then leave it for a few days until the aposteme stops; and let it be hidden in any way you can of levitation or invention.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And you know that the restoration and agglutination of him is more severe than the bone in which such things happen to him.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	Then strengthen it according to what will come later in the memory of it.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	But if there are two satagies in the bone, then it is necessary to cut this member that is broken into two parts, if it is the arm or the leg; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two ropes or with one rope and with your hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And be your position in which you pause the member that is placed according to its natural form, while the fractures are extending from the member, then know that you have to return those additions in their places, and in any way you can do it in their positions.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And guard according to your strength that it does not happen to the patient for your operation or injury; and persist according to the superior power that you apply one bone to another with its best forms.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	Then, in that hour, you take advantage of touching it with your hand, and if there is any other cause, correct it and hide it according to the quantity of your power.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And cause violent extensions and compressions, as when foolish things happen to the patient that cause an aposteme cautery by his operation, or cause a contraction in the member as we have seen it happen due to the operation of their foolish things.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	Then bind it, bind it and tighten it, and tighten the member, and rest and quietness; warn the patient about this in the hour of his vigils and his sleep, and see its revolution and movement, and know all his movements according to all your power; and wait until the position of the member is a correct one in which it does not feel pain, which is the cause when you feel the position of the member with pain; then change that member to another position of that with which you do not feel pain; and keep it in mind that the position of it there is upright and hidden, so that the member does not feel tortuosity when it is restored.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of the tightening of the member that I recommend is this; so that you know that broken members are diverse in their size and in their greatness and in the form of those.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And of those that are small, as with the arm and the leg, and similar to those, then the wrapping is of a thin fabric.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	But of those that are large, as with the hip or the back, then in those be a wrapping of both sides and tough, because the binding of one side connects the member with great strength by strenging it with all its parts with a stricture of both sides, rather than not being wrapped.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	Then begin, and do your calculations carefully, pause it with care for the patient's comfort, on the position of that fracture with three wrappings or four according to the member you desire; and strengthen your hand with a little rope.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	Then see how that one begins to be more firm at the position of the fracture, and strengthen your hand with which you have strengthened the position of the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	Then slightly extend the skin from the broken area, and soften the tightness little by little, until you feel a slight release.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	Then take another object and wrap that second cloth over the first one, wrapping it tightly around the area of the fracture; then place the wrapped part a little further from the fracture than before; and do your operation on the tightness of the first wrapping as well as softening the second one in accordance with what we have said about wrapping up.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	Then place between the wraps of stop-leopard or cloth that which is wrapped around the area of the fracture, if there is any curvature in it; and if not, do not pause for any reason.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	Then place another object over those wraps, and slightly extend them if there is any swelling or pus in the area, stopping after a while, then pause over that fluid which is causing the swelling and from where it is coming out; leave it for a few days; and then stretch it again.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	Then the sticks from which most of them are made should be made of different types of wood, some flexible and others not; or of palm branches; or of bamboo; and the length of each stick should match its shape and size.
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, the stick that is paused over that fracture should be a little thicker and closer to the other sticks than any of them; and its length according to the size and curvature of that limb; and stretch it gently, as we have said about curvature; and it is that tightness according to the location of the fracture, and how much further it is from the fracture, so make that tightness.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	Then the strings should be both thinner and softer, and if they are thick, do not pause them with other thick things; for it is a great mistake to feel the tightness equally with fingers that have been stretched;
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And very thin strings are not appropriate either, because you will not be able to feel the tightness with those strings; and it is not convenient that there be a gap between one stick and another:
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient is led by the ends of the sticks to feel the tightness in those locations, then pause with stop-leopard or woolen thread between them until that area does not cause him any injury.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Some types of fracture are caused by a sharp blow, and this causes a rupture in the tendon, and I remember that one on the Capitol according to its uniqueness.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And you should know that a broken limb is not stretched with sticks on the first day; for if the limb is large, it will not be able to pause over them until after three, seven, or more days, according to your safety in the event of swelling causing injury.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	This is the way that the ancient surgeons used to treat; they paused over a fracture and dislocation and twist.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Method of applying plaster as a shower for fracture treatment, complex in nature and mostly used for females and children, because it is not hot like water; and that is because you take powdered molasses, and this is the flour's medulla, which causes the movement of the millstone in the parts of the stone.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	Then prepare it as such, not with thin or soft cloth, but rather with the thick and coarse fabric of hemp, and use that.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another way to patch up fractures, dislocations, and twists: take a paste of asafoetida, lapdanum, acacia, fennel, and milky oak salve, all of which are said to be good for thousand dragons; of myrrh and aloes, one dragon; all of which should be finely ground and mixed with hot or cold water or milk depending on the condition of the patient's body. And then use this paste, since it is a good composition that gently restores broken bones, and gives strength to many people.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another way to make paste for fractures and twists: take a little milk of an almond tree, a dragon of myrrh, a dragon of aloes, a dragon of fennel, and half a dragon of white poplar sap; all of which are said to be good for thousand dragons.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All of them are made in a mortar to form a paste, and they are mixed with water or milk to make an ointment, and it is administered.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Method of applying plaster to joints and separated bones from their locations, and also for pain caused by cracks and fractures: Take woolen thread and dip it in vinegar and oil, then pause it over the area.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	It is not useful for this treatment, or to relieve pain caused by swelling or injury.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another method of applying plaster that restores a broken bone: Take sheets of fig tree and sheets of poppy, cut them into pieces, and mix them together to make an ointment.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida .i.; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Method of applying a newly invented plaster that also treats swelling causing injury: Take roots of almond, of chamomile, and violets, ground together with flour of erba, and all of it in equal parts. All of them are made in a thin layer and stretched out, if the limb is not hurt.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	If it is hurt, then prepare it with water of coriander that is slightly warm or with water and use it.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another way of applying plaster that is stronger and treats swelling: Take roots of almond, of licorice, of borage, marjoram, violets, chamomile, and all of them in equal parts; they are made into a thin layer and stretched out according to the size of the limb and its rest on the skin.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	You should not use it in the form of a roll that is paused over the broken limb to restore it, but rather only with wax and oil, and do not pause it for any other reason; and remember that it is between thickness and thinness.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	You should know that the applying of resin to the broken limb is a method of restoring it, and you can use myrrh, honey, and those resembling those causes we have mentioned:
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	A method of applying plaster to an injury and pain: Take ground walnut, caraway, and the hair of a man or bird, and the roots of almond, and salt, all mixed together; they are made into a thin layer and stretched out; then apply it.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	You should determine the amount according to how much the limb is painful and whether it is injured or not; if so, do not dislodge the plaster for a few days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if there is severe pain or swelling at the site, then you should remove it that hour, and then apply the plaster to it.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	Then take cloth of linen and sea sponge that is wet, dip it in vinegar and oil, and then pause it over the site until the swelling and pain subside; and then continue to apply plaster to it for a while, and then let it rest for an hour; and then place woolen thread dipped in vinegar and oil over it again, and then pour olive oil onto it. Continue applying plaster to it according to your knowledge of swelling causing injury, and it will relieve the pain of that area.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And now repeat that subtle constriction and thin paste and don't tighten it much for your first contraction, and now with that which is within be healed.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if the puss and pain and swelling and all those accidents are already gone away completely, and you no longer need paste or constriction, then repeat that massage as you have done with the patient lying down.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o .vii.; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if none of those causes happen to the member that we have said, then do not wait more than three days or four or five or six or seven; And some people leave it for twenty days according to what you see with your own eyes about the loosening of the member, as I have said, until the fracture heals, and place the meat over that.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And then adjust the constriction more than in your first contraction, and adjust the thickness of the food of the patient, according to what is followed by his memory.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	More if you see that the place of the fracture is completely dried and exhausted more than what covers it, then know that nutrition cannot reach it; and therefore wrap it in oily water for all to see that you are healing it a little; and let it be healthy after three days; and adjust the constriction slightly, and do this operation for the member so that it receives nutrition and is healed a little.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	More if it happens that the restoration of the fracture of the member is not restored at the beginning, according to what it covers, and is restored according to its tortuosity, it is an error according to the operation of them, and great fear, and if it were to be dried out there would grow larger the Old ones in their free places and spread out with water.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And I have not seen this happen to anyone, so it is reasonable that it does not happen.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Capitol According: Of the fracture when it happens on top of the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The species of fractures are small, and the figures of them are diverse, and the causes are distinct, since some fractures are caused by hitting with a stone, and the hit stops all the bone inside the skull, which is left without it, so that if this type of fracture happens in the fust, and because of this special case is called ascial; or the stone cuts some part of the bone, and cuts the meat of it and does not pass the cut within the last of it; and this species of fracture is called absolute levitation.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the plague of these two types of fractures is great or small, and of the fracture that is contraction or contraction; and its cause is hitting with a stone or falling on the ground, and their similarity.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture is penetrating that it brings the skin near to the bone, which is left without it; or it is on the face of the bone, and the plague of these two types of fractures is great or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And of the fracture is that it is absorbed in the bone, in the subtility of small hair, and because of this special fracture is called the Capillary fracture.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And it is a fracture that happens or because of hitting with the ground or because of hitting with a stone, and its similarity, which makes some layer of the bone enter inside the parts, and it is made in the concave place as if you happen to the bones when they hit each other, and it is broken into pieces by their entrance into the inner parts.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	And more often it happens in human bodies, as if it were the heads of infants.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And so these various types of fractures happen, and they are difficult tasks to heal as if they were separate.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And I come back with the memory of all this in my place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	I have learned all these various types of fractures through detection on those and through inquiry about them, and from the corruption of flesh that is on them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And the Capillary specialty is recognized by the blood that appears on the bone, and it is removed, and placed above it because the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	More at the beginning of the treatment of fractures, take into account the accidents of the patient, and then if you see by manifest sign that it means pain, as if vomiting with cholera, and exhaustion, and loss of mind, and absence of thought, and fainting, and high fever, and cold sweat of them, and similarity to their symptoms in the major cases, it is not healed.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if you do not see those non-curable accidents, then begin the patient's treatment.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	The cause is that if it has come to you the plague at the beginning when it is plagued, and it is in the winter days, then know that you study the healing of the bone before day twelve according to all disposition.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is in the summer days, then know that you heal the bone before day seven, without letting the skin be left without the bone, and that the accidents happen which we have said.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already reached the skin that covers the neck, and it is broken into small pieces and broken, then know that you cut the broken piece according to what I have said to you.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And that you cut the head of the patient who is plagued, and discover on the bone according to custom and in the way that you can as if the plague is on the neck, and it is light on the patient.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if you happen to the patient, pause the detection of the bone, and apply cold water or ice, and let rest the pain in such a way that it is calmed down the puss, and be sure that the flow of the sanc; and then begin in the circulation of the bone and in the removal of it.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	That is according to one of two ways of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the first way is that you cut the bone with a sharp knife in a straight line, and this is how it is done: And then apply another sharp knife to this, a little less than that; and this is how it is done:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And then apply more of the knife that is wider than the second.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And then know the names of different knives, some of which are wider than others; and some of them are sharper than others, and they are in the edge of their sharpness, and they are made of iron or steel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use them with ease in hitting the knife so that it does not make a sound when striking the bone, and do not hit that.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is strong and hard, then know that you pierce in the circulation of it before you administer the knives to it, using the thin knives.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And these are not named in this way because they do not stop the end of the bone at the tip, as if it were a sharp edge or a small circle on the bone that is left without its top, similar to an edge or a small circle, which prevents submerging and passing the thickness of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	And it is convenient that you take many of these thin knives according to what each bone needs, within what is presented in all the bones of the neck, the end of which is sharp, the length and brevity are according to the amount of thickness of this neck.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	And this is the form of three types of knives: The quality of piercing in the circulation of the broken bone is that you pause the knife on the bone and turn it with the handles, and then put it in another place, and pause it where there is a hole through all the thickness of the ray or wrap it around.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And then insert the incision tool between each notch of the bone and make that little pus that you can put on it in the end to levitate, as we have said, until you root out the bone, or with your hand, or with any other tool by which you will equip yourself for water, as well as with tweezers and delicate forceps.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And be careful that the incision instrument does not touch any cause of the patient's back.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And then when you have pierced the bone, separate it from the patient if it continues, and extract it, because you will take it out with sharp tools that are similar to incision instruments, but more rather because it is a little pus and a little subtle than other incision instruments.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if there is any small bone left and it is dry, then take it off with ease by using water; and then cure the wound with lime and wipe off the blood that we have said.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the other way of doing it is to cut it off, far from pain, which is what Gualia and the saw do by means of a loud noise; and this is how it sounds: It is necessary for you in the beginning that you start to uncover the bone's joint where there is a violent and obvious fracture, until when you have uncovered that joint and have paused it from both sides with this slow and pleasant incision tool whose form is:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And it is that the joint is round and does not insert into any cause, and the joint is acute and has two lengths in length, as well as often; that the joint is adjusted to the back with the side of the incision that is sharp on the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And then hit hard on the incision tool of one joint with a little mallet so that you cut all the bone easily, thus avoiding any accident that you fear in any way, and if the medicine is pus from all people and more ignorant of their nature; certainly, and if it was sleeping.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	And then if there is any cause attached to the bone of the skin in some places of bones, incise that with the side of the incision tool that is round, and free it easily, because it is freed from him without causing pain or danger.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the bone fracture does not penetrate into the skin, and what is separated from the bone is its surface, and it is dry and thin, then cut off that surface and remove those thins with sharp tools that you have prepared in different quantities so that you can administer them in all places where pus is convenient for them and the right amount of them according to the bone on which you operate; this os broken and its shape.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And when you administer the right amount of those sharp tools at the beginning with which you cut the bone in length, and then use the least subtle of them, and do not stop doing that until you reach the place where you can administer the same pus to all of them.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	But in any other small fractures or thin fractures, administer care according to the bone on which you operate.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And that is why it is not learned by all who have studied it in that work.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	So write to us if you have shown us in great fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the skin is rectangular when you remove the bone, then take a cloth according to the quantity of the wound, and submerge it in rosin oil, and put that over the opening of the wound; and then take another cloth that is folded or tripled, and submerge it in vinegar and rosin oil, and put that over the first cloth and make the incision little by little as much as you can on it, so that it does not hurt the ciphac; and then administer a little lacing thread, and do not tighten it except for the quantity of the wound only.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And leave that with this cure for a day or two until you are sure of the pus; and then take off that one and then administer medicines with which it is unnecessary to dry up, such as rye flour and wheat flour, and spice powder, and similar things to those.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And that is because you have to make a powder of these medicines so that it is powdered over the wound, as they are dry; and generally, administer all medicine whose property is that it sucks and does not bite.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And keep according to your virtue that the wound in your cure is clear; and is not in the surdicia of ointment or any other; nor do you leave adding virulence to it; because when it is put together on the skin of the patient, it corrupts that one and does not benefit that one, and causes harm to him.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And happens in the patient's head, and when it is taken out the bone and more importantly when its cure is spoken, and it is darker on its surface; and then consider now if it happens to the malice the accidents that we have said, you will know that it is dangerous for all.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas .iii., e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it does not happen to be dark because of the medicine that is put on top of it, and if that medicine makes that dark, then take a part of honey and a part of rose oil made into a paste. iii. and put a cloth on those lines and put that over the ciphac; and then cure it with the spices of cure in which it is convenient to be healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter. iii.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	Of restoring the nose when it is broken.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	You will know that it is not broken by the nose but two parts of pus are separate, or one of those little bones seen, because there are two bones in it, because the split between them is cartilaginous, and it is not broken, and does not happen to it except for a bit and twist and lack of smooth.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	And if one of the two parts of it is broken, then take a small knife into the patient' nose and put that fracture within the little bone, and on the outside pus, so that the nose returns to its natural shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	Let it be done by you with ease, and keep for your own operation on the patient' head.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose where it has a small thickness, then make it even at the end of the bone in which it is broken.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if there are two fractures, then you make the shape of it similar to that.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And rest for the restoration of it on the first day of the fracture if possible; and then, if not, then prepare to take a little rest by doing this.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And then introduce a cloth in the end of the nose with a small amount of medicine, if the fracture is in one part, or two little amounts, if the fracture is in two parts, and make it as thick as much as it fills the nose' notch.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And say some of the little restorer things that the calguas are wrapped in a cloth, and they are changed every day, but I do not see it; until you leave the cloth wrapped in egg white with powder; and then leave that one there while the bone is held and the cartilage hardens.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And some little bones in the nose are wrapped together, instead of one, otherwise the nose will be wrapped with a cloth that is very thick; and it is that you have broken the patient' nose because it has caused pain to him so that he cannot breathe properly.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	And this reason is not necessary for you; and if you want, do one, and if you want, do two.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if it happens that another wound is infected, apply a plaster of honey with charred herbs and olive oil and rosemary, or diaquilone.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	But if another wound is not infected, then apply that on the outside with flour of sago and powder of ensets mixed with egg white; and place it over the stump, and do not put the nose there for any reason.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	But if the bones of the nose are broken or crushed, then cut them off and remove them with a suitable instrument; and sew up the opening and treat it with water that hardens and heals it and with plasters that suit it.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	And if there is a plague inside the nose, then you should treat that with calamine and lead pipes placed inside so that it may be completely cured.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter III.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	On the restoration of the jaw when it is dislocated.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jaw is broken and the fracture is not deep, and it does not seem to be dislocated and bent on either side, then its recovery is easy.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	And therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, you shall introduce the little finger of the left hand into the patient's mouth; and, if the fracture is on the left side, then introduce the little finger of the right hand; and easily push the fracture back in place with your thumb, and gently set the bone in position with your other hand, moving it slightly from side to side. And do this carefully.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the jaw fracture has separated into two pieces, then you should administer extension of two parts according to its shape so that you can restore its equilibrium.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if there is a concussion of the teeth and a disruption, then strengthen those which you hope will hold fast with gold, silver, or cedar; and place them over the broken jaw with wax, and place them over a double drape, and place a star-shaped drape over it gently made, or a single loop to the length of the jaw; and bind it in place according to its shape, so that it is not destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And command the patient to rest and keep calm, and give them sips of warm liquid.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you suspect that its shape has been altered in any way, then you shall fast for three days; and afterwards, correct what is wrong with it and apply plaster to it with flour of poppy, egg white, or sago, so that you have not removed the wax, and place it over the plaster.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And then, when it is well-attached and the position of the bone is not altered, leave it alone, so that it may heal completely and strengthen the fracture; for if you remove it again, this fracture will take three weeks to heal.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if another wound is infected again, then administer the water that we have mentioned to you for the prevention of infections until it is healed, and do not remove the poultice.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is infected, then consider whether it is separated into two pieces or has become loose; and you shall gently move those pieces with water that suits them for their removal from the instruments.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the wound of the infection is small, then you shall increase the bleeding according to your need.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And when you have removed those loose pieces, then sew up the wound if it is wide; and otherwise, place a plaster on it so that it may heal.
Capitol .v.	Chapter V.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	On the restoration of the fork (forchetta) when it is dislocated.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	The fork (forchetta) may be broken in three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	Or it may be dislocated, or separated, or separated into two pieces that do not cause loose ends; but its recovery is easy; or it may be broken in such a way as to cause loose ends, and its recovery is difficult; or it may be infected.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And the operation in that case, when the fracture is infected, is that you should have ready two ministers, one of whom shall keep the fork fixed and the other shall extend the neck towards the part where it is broken;
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	And then bind the fracture with twine according to its shape so that it is not made into a lump or hollow; and do not place it in a small prominence or cavity.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if you are worried about the extension of the back, then stop it with a drape or woollen cloth, and make it as large as your need requires; and extend and raise the fork and bind the neck according to its shape so that you do not tie it too tightly.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot reach the end of the fork to the outside, as it comes out through the neck, then the patient should be laid on his back, and a small cushion placed under him; and place a hand over the muscle so that it does not move.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the minister should press the back of the patient so that the bone of the fork is raised where it comes out through the neck; and then you shall correct the fracture and bind it with twine.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	But if you feel loose ends of the fork and they are bothering you, then cut them off with a sharp knife.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is retained in the bone, then you shall use one of your instruments that you have placed under it, for you have removed the fork from the instrument with which you were using it; and this instrument can be made of wood or iron, of which this shape is made.
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And it seems like a cup in which this shape is the cavity; and its width should be according to the water that you require for it, and its size according to the size of the bone or the length of the neck.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	But the length of it should be according to what you can manage in the operation; that there be two ends, one broad and the other narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the infection that you have cut off from the bone is wide, and you are sure that there will be no wound, then you shall sew up the two lips of the wound with a thread.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the disruption is small, or you are afraid of an infection, then you shall use cloth and powder according to the quantity of the wound.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if there is an infection again, then apply honey with vinegar and olive oil and rose water, and place it over the wound.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	And when the bone is broken and separated, then apply plaster that has been made fine with flour of poppy and egg white, and place it over the back, and make a knot in it; and place the stork over the neck, and reduce the plaster as the fracture becomes tight, and when it is tight, you shall wrap it with cloth; and do not tie it too tightly.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And altogether, that the stork does not break the broken bone; and therefore, each day, when the plaster is softening or the stork has been removed, then you shall correct what is wrong and tighten the ligature.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And then place the patient's sleep on his neck, and put a pillow under them, so that he does not lie flat on his back, because it raises the helpers of him from the ground, and therefore the fracture of the furcula is raised to the elevation of the muscle; or, that is, his arms are tied to his neck.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not remove the ligature if it does not occur immediately in the place, unless after 12 days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And renew the plaster if you see his face in water, and tighten it and restore it, until he is restored and the fracture of the furcula is coagulated.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it is strengthened and comfortable according to the month in 28 days, and some healed in certain times of that.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	Of the restoration of a shoulder fracture.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The spatula pie is broken in its place, and it is not broken on him, but only the edges.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And when it is broken its place - and it is broken in his middle place - and it is not known except by touching, then according to that figure of the fracture dislocates you prepare him and reduce that according to the natural figure in all ways to invent the which is at your possible.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	And then put on his place powder of meal with white of egg and rub it; and then put a cloth double; and then put on him a table knife according to the quantity of the spatula whole or a little less.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	More if you leave the stela is a concave place in some of the places of the spatula, then you fill that concave place with white of egg, and then put on him a table according to equality.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And then strengthen it above with a long thread from the constriction of the skin and the tightening of the table until it is not moved out of its place.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And consider the ligature every day; and all that it is softened, renew it and tighten the table if it is moved out of its place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And hit the patient on his back with a staff.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	And the spatula is restored in 20 days or in 25.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And when this number is completed, then you dissolve the ligature, and that you know assured because that is of the bones from which the beginning was not torn and its dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you treat the place of the bone pain and leave the knot, then cut it on him, and heal according to what we have said in the fracture of the furcula of sudden pain of poultice if it occurs here.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	Of the restoration of a foot fracture.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The foot, some healed is broken in the middle place of him and he is broken inside it; but the extremities of him move that they are not ciccatices and comminuted.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And from the accidents of him when it is broken its middle part is that it declines to the inside parts and occurs to him great pain, and difficulty in walking, and hoarseness, and weakness, and vomiting blood; and it is declared in his cavity in the broken bone and it is not hidden from feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And the restoration of him is that he be raised up the patient on his two feet, and place a cushion between his shoulders; and press the muscles of him, and adjust the ribs of him to the sides of the two ribs, and carefully in the operation of him and in the equation according to all ways that it is possible and convenient to water, until return the figure of the bone according to what we have said.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	And then put on him the plaster and the wool and place a table cloth in levitation, because you wrap that in a cloth; and then carefully tie that on the broken bone that it is not moved out; and go to the ligature according to its roundness on the back of some healed, and tighten that well; and then consider the ligature every hour, and when it is softened, tighten that.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	And if necessity provokes to dislodge that, because of corrosion or pruritus, or pain, or poultice which it occurs in the place, then you cut off and free that, and remove the plaster and correct him what it happens through water according to a way of cure for him; and then reduce the plaster, if it is necessary to wet his face; and adjust the tightening until it is healed.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	Of the restoration of ribs when they are broken.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	Know that the fracture of ribs happens only in large places which go to the two sides; and from the extremities of them from the place of departure do not happen to those contusions because they are cartilage.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And the feeling of him is not hidden from feeling, because it seeks his knowledge according to what we have said.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration be as such that it joins the fracture according to a possible way, until it is swallowed according to what we have said; and then put on him the plaster and tighten the bone broken with a table, if you feel pain from him.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And if the fracture of ribs is declining to the inside parts, then occurs to him great pain and stinging, so that it happens to him that he has wept, because the bone is covered with a veil; and occurs to him difficulty in walking, and hoarseness, and vomiting from a sudden motion; and this is difficult for cure.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And the ancient people are prepared already to heal those with a medicine that has healing properties.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And of them so say: Cover the patient to heal his wounds that cause inflammation and ventilation, so that the belly is inflated and extended, and the fracture is pushed to the outside parts.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	And we will cool him water because it is not a cause of inflammation to generate poultice if it occurs; and if it has already occurred, then it helps already to water.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And some of them say that it is necessary to cool him well and to put on him clothes that do not heat up; and it seems similar to a reasoning, but it is more feared that the ventilation will throw the superfluities to the place because of his weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	And some of them say: Cover the place with a wool that is already submerged in oil for it, and make between the ribs to be filled, because the ligature encloses that according to its roundness; and then he is cured the patient with a cure of pleurisy, food, and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if it is a violent constriction on the patient that he does not suffer, and the bone puts a veil on it with stinging pain, they are afraid of the patient, then cover him because it breaks in the place, uncover that one part which keeps the seal, because we do not remember its description, and we write the bone with ease, and extract it.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And then we will tighten the two lips of the wound if it is large with a poultice, and heal that with plaster until it is healed.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if there is an apoplexy inside him, then you cut off and put in oil, and place on it a poultice to cure the patient from that apoplexy inside him.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And he is raised up on his back until it is healed.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	Of the restoration of a fracture of the spine of the two and the neck.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Some healed the bones of the neck, and it is broken into its place, and similar to those of the spine of the two.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And when it happens to some of them and you want to know if it will be healed or not, then consider because, if the times they are already softened and stupefied and dead and cannot move those bones, and when they feel pain in those parts, then you know that it does not heal, and in the time of disposition is mortal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if they stand or sit there with those constraints and the doctor pricks them, then know that the back of the neck is safe and that the patient will be healed through treatment.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you see the spine of the neck immersed in water and want to know whether it will heal or not, then consider the feet.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	And if you think they are already softened, approach those waters that happen to the feet, and when you step on them, there is wind and diarrhea as their will, and some pee standing up and can't, then know that it is fatal, and then do not work on their treatment.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	But if none of those causes happen, the cause is better and more easily treated.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And the treatment of the patient is that you pierce into the spine's back or side, or apply hot stones to it; place it over the spine or side, and some people say that piercing into one of their feet causes a sedative effect that stops the spine's pain.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	Then place one of the comforting compresses that exist, and tighten it over that part with thread; and order the patient to use rest and tranquility and not sleep on the bed where they get pain, so that it is healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if the fracture of the bone is severe or there is some cause that has already separated it from the body, then cut off what is attached to the spine and tighten it with a string, and adjust the two lips of the wound, suturing them if they are large; and heal those with encrustations, so that it is healed.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	But if the back of the leg is broken, and it is the end of the fracture, then cut off what is attached to the spine and tighten it with a string, and adjust the two lips of the wound, suturing them as best you can according to the situation; and place a compress over it and wrap it up, if you feel like doing so, and tighten that.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel severe pain in the foot, then cut off what is attached to it and tighten it with a string, and heal the wound with treatment that precedes it, so that it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De restauracio de la ancha.	Of Restoring the Ankle.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the ankle are often broken, and if they are broken, their fracture is not but a common communication between its extremities and is spread along its length and declines at the joints; and pain and pricking occur in the place where it is fractured, and the chest is stunned when the fracture occurs.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And the restoration of the patient is that you extend your hand over it so that it is above the fracture, which is the figure of it.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	And if the fracture is only at the end of the foot, then you should extend your hand over it so that it is in line with its natural figure, according to what you can do with ease.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	But if the fracture is long or has already declined at the joints, then you should prepare the patient's abdomen for your treatment of that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And when you have healed that foot, place a compress over it, and tighten with a string that does not cause pain or movement of the stilha.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And fill the concave shape with water that fills that foot within equality, and order the patient to sleep on their side or open their body.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	But if an apoplexy happens, then you should stop your treatment of the patient until it is sedated, and place a compress over that water according to what comes before; and then return to restoring the foot, and tighten it with thread and wax.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if the bone is fractured or broken into pieces, you should put them back together.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	Of Restoring the Fracture of the Ankle-bone.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	The aduttore is that which is between the armpit and the top of the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	If it is broken, the restoration of the patient is done in one of two ways, and the first is that you take a piece of wood and sharpen it with a sharpener; then, place a compress over the break, and wrap it up tightly with a string.
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And tie the two ends together tightly, so that they are suspended from an elevated place.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And let the patient sit on a stool; and then cut out the broken part of the arm with a knife, so that it reaches the tip of the hand where it is attached to the arm's curvature.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And suspend over that difficult cause, or the medicine extends to the ends of the foot; and then the doctor treats the fracture along with the patient's other illnesses, so that the fracture returns according to what it can do.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	The other way is that the patient is raised up on their neck, and their hand is suspended from the collar with thread; and order two servants that one hold water to open the fracture with its hands, and the other holds the feet apart.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want to make the expansion stronger, then you should tighten with thread on the fracture and on the foot with another thread, and order each of the two servants to stretch one end.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And if the fracture is close to the end of the muscle, then cut off what is attached to the bone halfway, and the other half covers the break where it should be.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And if the fracture is almost at the end of the muscle, then cut off what is attached to the bone above that point and place it over the break.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Eat the foot with ease and work on it, and when you have healed it according to what is needed, then tighten it if an apoplexy does not happen.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	But if an apoplexy happens, then release the stricture after seven days, and place a compress of sour milk and wine on it to stop the apoplexy, and then tighten it.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	The way to tighten that foot is that you place a compress over the fracture, and then wrap it up tightly with a cloth; and then adjust the arms above the aduttore, and place their hands on the muscles.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And then remove the cloth and tighten the arms above the aduttore, so that the arm is in place of the stilha, unless you prevent it from happening due to a bone fracture.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	Then use stilhs.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And that is because you place the stilys over the fracture that they are placed farther apart and closer together than the rest of the stilys, adding three fingers to the entire length of the stilys according to the fracture.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And then tighten the stilys with the same string that was used at the beginning of this chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And your tightening on the spot of the fracture should be tighter.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And when the fracture is healed, the string should be looser.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And if you change the position of the stilys and the tightening according to what I said in the hour when you restore the member to its place, then do so.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear an apoplexy, then release the string and the stilys after seven days according to what I said before.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And then consider the members in three different ways for seven days so that it does not cause pruritus or swelling in the place; or if the food reaches the member through a path of superfluity of the string; and then correct everything according to what I said before.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	But if you are sure that none of those causes will happen, then do not remove the ligature until three or more days have passed.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And so be his sleep of the patient on his back, and his arms are on his sides, over his stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And pause over the assistant surgeon who is full of wool, and consider throughout the night or day that the shape of the injured member does not distort or dissolve, so correct it completely with your virtue.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And pause the food of the patient according to the order that we have mentioned above, until the food is refined in its beginning so that it hardens when it is cooked; and when it has thickened, cover it.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	It is the custom of the assistant surgeon and the mattress of the patient that they are made strong in ten days; and then, when they have hardened, they are separated and washed and given medicine with which those who treat them correct it.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is stiff and broken, then you do not separate that limb and the bones from each other within one or two months.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	On the Restoration of a Broken Arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The arm is composed of two bones called two forks; one is small, and is that which has broken the push, and the other is large and is that which is left behind the small said, from the starting point behind.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And a strong break has been made in the larger fork alone, or in the small one, and a strong lock has been made together.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when the small fork is broken above, then the restoration of it is lighter, and its cure is faster.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when the small fork is broken below, then the fracture is bad and the cure of it is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And worse than that is when two bones are broken together.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	So if the bone that is broken is the small fork above, then it is appropriate for the doctor, considering the restoration of it, to make a small incision with ease as soon as it is covered.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	But if the large fork is that which is broken, then consider making an incision more violently.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both forks are broken together, then consider making the incision with a stronger tool.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And since you have placed the shape of the hand and extended it on a cushion, and the palm of the hand is towards the starting point above, more than all the others say, and the auricular (knuckle) is lower than all the others say, and the patient's foot is touching a raised mat.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	Is a cushion in front of him in height or upright position, so that the patient does not tire himself out.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	Then the minister extends the arm from the starting point behind with his hand or limb, and another minister extends over it.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	Then the doctor covers the bone with wool before he sews it according to the best shape that can be made.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if in the fracture of the bone is slow, then you pierce through it with your virtue all at once.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if it appears in slow separation that the bone is sticking out and is not to your expectation in its restoration, then you bend over it and adjust it according to the way we have mentioned above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	But if the fracture is severe, I have already written a unique chapter on it, and therefore take the cure of it.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if a fever occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then you wash with a cold cloth made of wool and white wax, and make it thin between clarity and subtlety, and tighten the cloth tightly over that fracture until the fever subsides; and then remove the cloth and put on plaster prepared from flour of poplar, and place the stirrups; and let the one which is placed be above that fracture further to the left and stronger.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	You know that the number of stirrups for the arm is in major proportion, or that the fracture is in one fork or in two together.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	Then you place your stricture on the location of the fracture further and stronger, and faster and more violent, and when it is less strict at the starting point of the fracture or further down than the starting point, then you make it less strict a little bit according to that recollection at the beginning of the chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the clothes that are wrapped around the fracture are soft and damp cloths, not hard or sharp, and the true one is made strong by itself according to what has been mentioned above.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	Consider the member with the wrap for ten days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if there occurs any cause of which correction is necessary, and you feel it acutely in the member, then consider that you inject the member with cold water until the acuteness subsides.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And do not constrict the member until it rests, and then return to the stricture.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the stricture is already softened and the bone has completely healed with appearances like those before him, then you correct it all at once with your virtue.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And consider also if the nutrition of the member is prohibited by excess stricture, for it is appropriate that you soften it a little and leave it alone for several days so that it runs to the nutrition, and then strengthen it.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	But if there is no cause of those that we have mentioned, then consider that it should not be unwrapped within a period of approximately twenty days or more around that time.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	Then hang the hand of the patient by its virtue of moving it, and make him sleep on his back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	You know that this fracture has been restored in thirty days or in thirty-two days, or a strong break has been restored in twenty-eight days, and all of it is according to the dispositions of the complex and the dispositions of virtue.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	On the Restoration of a Broken Wrist and of the Fingers.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	You know that to the wrist and to the fingers with ten digits there is a fracture of the same type as a finger, and do not occur to them on the right or left side.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And if there occurs to the patient's hand a fracture or a break of the same type, then consider that he walks with his head forward and not back, and when he extends it, place the hand in front of him.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	Then the minister extends the broken bones and the doctor covers them with good wound, making a smooth shape.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	Then consider that you put on plaster and cotton, not causing a fever; and then place the stirrups above the quantity of the location, and you have wrapped it in a cloth.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	But if the lock is in the inner part of the hand, then make a shape like a cloth, and order the patient to tighten his locked hand with long cloth; then it should be bound with a long cloth.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And let the stirrup of wood be placed on the cloth so that it is lifted up, in order that the wood applies to the palm; and tighten it according to that which has been said.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	But if the fracture is in the outer part, then consider that you place above it two stirrups of wood on the palm, so that the hand remains open and not closed; and then return to the stricture, as when the hand is turned between the fingers with a cloth.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	And if there occurs a fracture to one of the fingers, then consider that it is the little finger, and make it engaged according to what has been said; and then tighten it with a small cloth, turning the hand so that the fracture does not hurt.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	But if the fracture occurs to one of the other fingers, whether to that which is in the middle, or at the index, or at the auricular, or at the ring finger, then consider that it be engaged according to what has been said by this index; or all are engaged together according to continuity, and this is better; or place over a small stirrup, as when we have mentioned above in the little finger.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider in your recovery and those the disposition of the pustules to the opposite -- for this is his proper operation -- that when some of these causes occur according to what is recounted in him.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter XIV.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	On the Restoration of a Broken Bone of the Thigh.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The thigh bone has two ends which are broken and revealed, and it is reduced to the proper position according as the head comes forward and the pustule rises.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	And the restoration of him is done in such a way that the ligament is reinforced over the fracture and another ligament leaves the fracture, and the patient lies on his stomach and on his face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	Then the minister extends all the ligament according to the quality, when the fracture is in its middle part of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	But if it has happened to the root of the thigh, then the ligament is extended from below to the middle part of the leg, in order that the extension may catch in its place, and the other ligament leaves the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And if the break has happened to the root, then the ligament is made from below to the middle part, and the extension is made at its ends.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And the doctor makes the bone join together by good jointure according to its natural appearance, and the bone is united; then cover with plaster and tighten it, if it does not ache in the limb; and that will be sufficient.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	But if it happens to the apostema, then you shall leave it for several days until the pustule is dried up, and then return to your treatment.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The tightening of him is done in such a way: that a hard bandage be wrapped around the fracture, and that it be doubled two or three times, and that the superfluity be removed; and then wrap up the leg so that it enters into the stocking and into the root of the thigh.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And insert a long piece of cloth between the leg and the bandage from the root to the ends on both sides, and bring the two ends of the piece of cloth over the bandage and the leg so that what is superfluous be removed from the bandage; and then return it to the bandage and the leg.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And place over the thigh in the place of the broken bone a wooden staff, and place another one on the leg.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	And fill up the spaces between the bandage and the thigh with soft cloth, so that the tightening be firm.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And begin the good strong tightening of him on the place of the fracture with three or four wrappings, and how much more you leave the ligament in the place of the fracture, your tightening will be less strong and lighter and moister.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	And extend two ends of the cloth to the ends on both sides until it enters into the cavity of the foot, and strengthen both ends of the wooden staff of the other side that the ligament may not be moved from its place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And leave the tightening on it, since this is not likely to cause any injury of corrosion, pustule or swelling there; and if any cause of these happens, then try to remove it gradually, and correct what has happened as soon as possible, according to what we have said.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is thicker than that on which it was placed, then cover it as much as possible; and if not, remove it and heal him with water in which the healing has happened before, until he be cured.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	Some of these fractures of the thigh are strengthened by the ligaments being adjusted to them, as we have said in the assistant and in the arms.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	But nevertheless in the restoration of him is done in such a way that it does not cause any clumsiness in the patient; and if he is restored alone, another water is applied to which the other leg is applied, so that he may be clumsier there.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	You know that the thigh is strengthened in ten days or a few more or fewer, and all this depends on the diversity of conditions and the other arrangements.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	On the Restoration of the Fracture of the Ankle Bone.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	You know that the fracture of the ankle is healed sooner, but if it happens to be at the back, then...
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	But if it happens to the fracture, then there is only a crack or a split in the ends, and that is either dry or wet, and all this is according to what we have said.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And the restoration of him is done in such a way that he is extended from his ends, as much as possible, and that it is united and joined according to what is easy and convenient and possible.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	And place a round wooden staff on the ankle, if you are in need of it; and tighten it with a good tightening to the water.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	And consider all the arrangements which we have recommended for other fractures, as well as the possibility of a pustule being formed and similar things; and if any accident happens to him, try it gradually with water which is convenient to him until he be healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	On the Restoration of the Fracture of the Leg.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	You know that in the leg there are two bones which one is large and is called the femur, and the other is small and is called the tibia; and between them runs a joint which is called the knee.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	It happens to all kinds of fractures of the leg as it does to the two bones of the arm, and the operation for the one is like that for the other; and the dismemberment is also similar.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	But if both bones are broken together, then the leg is dislocated completely.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if the smaller bone is broken, then the leg is dislocated in front.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if the larger bone is broken, it comes forward, and these are causes which are not suitable to you.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	And administer with a good stretching of the ends according to that gualing.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	But if the fracture of the leg is not serious, having no swollen places, then the stretching should be light and gentle, and it will be a blessing to you.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	In the leg there is a need for an operation on the arm, and it is when you join the ends and complete all the work; then take care of the bones with a sharp knife from the palm tree which is removed from the small ones, and do not cut the thick parts of the hands, and the length should be taken according to that of the leg, and from the root to the ends.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And wrap each cloth in two wrappings according to the length of it, and place one over the root of the leg from one side, and the other over it from the other side, and they are placed from the root to the ends of the foot.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	And bind the two ends of the two sticks in three places, two on each side and one at the middle; for with this stretching the leg does not clatter to the right or to the left, and it is in a good position.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And an armful of palm wood has already been administered according to the length of the leg; and let it rest in him that he may retain its movement.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	Much more should you use water when you are healing a fracture, and when it is healed properly.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And consider every day the leg and study it well, and you should guard it against any cause which is similar to a pustule; and if any of these causes happen, then try to remove it gradually with water so that he be healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	Of the fracture of the talus bone and the bones of the foot, and the dislocation.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	To the talus bone, it does not happen a fracture of all; but to the bones of the foot it happens a fracture in some places; and to the hernia of the leg, it rarely happens a fracture, and not to them except in the lower part of the body.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if the bones of the foot have a fracture and those bones are elevated above themselves, then place the patient on their feet prepared like this.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	And approach one foot over that which is elevated from those bones, and approach those, and press, and fit them in their places.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	Then place plaster and bandage over it, and place the patient's abdomen on a small table, where there are two heads of a plier.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	Then tighten those with the foot stretched downward, because you have wrapped it in linen and other causes from which it is injured.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And after three or four days pass by, then remove the splint because you will think that the bones are fixed in place, or they are caught or displaced; and the operation on those is so with a pointed instrument.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	But if any of them are caught, then restore those, and fit them in place with oil and remords to you in the restoration of those of the hand.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	And place the pin in such a way according to its length, and set it aside slightly; and place the foot on the table that you were advised, and tighten those with the foot stretched downward.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	But if that which is caught of the bones are two or three or more, then you place the pin in such a way according to its length wrapped in linen, and tighten the table on the top base of the foot, and let it stand on one of the heads of the table through the abdomen so that it holds well.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is convenient to you that you do not forget that you consider all the causes which have been said to you in the other fractures of the accidents that we have mentioned; and approach yourself to every accident when it comes.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVII.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	Of the fracture of the jawbone of the femur and the hipbone, and of the staff of the man.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the jawbone is caught, then cut that in half with a saw; and approach it to the joint of the two a little inclined, and fit it.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And the midwife ties that in a crotch, and fits it in the jaw with a string; and approach that to the joint of the two a little inclined, because all that is caught inside is out front there; and the woman is dislocated, and lifts up the two legs little by little, because all that is caught inside returns.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And place dust on the two legs, and when she wants to urinate remove that with ease and approach it, and reduce it a little; and return it according to the way it was at first, and approach it again to the man.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And do so for seven days or more because that is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you want to, take a bladder of olive oil and tighten it over the root of the leg with a pipe; and push all that bladder into the jaw, and approach it to blow into the pipe with power inside the jaw because the fracture returns.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And let that be filled with a crotch and be for several days according to what we have said, so that it is healed.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the hipbone of man or woman is caught, then administer in the restoration and puncturing of that which we have mentioned in the bones of the leg.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And that which is right does not hide these fractures of nearby bones and rarely happens, mostly to those on whom a study and use has been made and understood in this my book; because that fracture signifies to you in the main situations by right-handedness in the restoration and tightening of it, and so they understand well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	But in the staff of the man when it is caught, take a bandage of linen, and wrap that staff; and approach it to the wrapping, and let it be wrapped for three days or more, so that it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	Of the Restoration of Fracture of Bones when it is wet.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient to you if the fracture happens by wetness, and mostly if the bone is big such as the bone of the leg or the joint, or similar to that, that you let it rest and flush it sometimes if the conditions of flushing are evident to you thus far have we said.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the blood flows, then you let it rest and flush it sometimes if you sprinkle on it dry earth triturated, unless another cause is presented to you.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And begin the restoration of that fracture in a single day, and do not prolong it, unless an apoplexy happens.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	But if an apoplexy happens carefully, then you let it rest for nine days, so that the apoplexy subsides, and do not approach it on the third day and the ninth of all, because you will cause a bad accident.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	But if the broken bone is imminent on the joint discovered, then you let it be reduced and fit it in with your own hands with ease and a little extension.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	But if the extension is not prepared for you and your own hands, then you reduce that bone with your own hands according to its length, which is seven or eight days; and a long time, which is two days, according to the quantity of blood; and it is necessary that the doctor take from those three or four, depending on the amount that you require for the cure in all kinds of fractures.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And be gentle, and be in it a little gentleness that it is not bent twice the compression on it at the hour of the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And be in sharpness on the part which is cut, and be the dust of the leg with a thin thread, and of the bulk of it within the joints.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	This is the form of it:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	It is called in Greek "labra volentz atelarem", which means gentle and long-suffering.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	That the end of it be raised, so that it is higher than the end of the bone that is imminent.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And place that in a bowl within which returns the bone, and fit it with a certain equation.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And then strive to fit the ends of the fracture between them, and if the end that is caught is fine, and you do not pick up the instrument because it has the power to break; but if you cannot pick it up, then take another instrument with which you have the power to cut.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	But if you cannot reduce the bone completely with water that we have mentioned, then cut it with water that we have said; or saw it with one of the saws in some way so that it is possible for you to do.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	And approach it quickly to the bone of roughness and small scratches.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone has been reduced, and the patient's pain is great and burning, then you will know that the bone has not returned to its natural position; and then do what you wish to the man because you confer great benefit.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	And when your restoration is complete which you make to the bone, and then place a linen bandage of black color, especially if it is in summer, and do not approach it on the apoplexy or any other cause by which it might happen a bad outcome or corruption.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And then administer stars at the time of the third step of bone restoration, and leave the wound uncovered until you cut with scissors and wrap according to the amount of the wound.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And be very careful not to strain the wound with a fracture, for it can cause bad symptoms, and may cause death or corruption or putrefaction in them, so that they heal.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if the tightness is soft, unlike the tightness of other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the wound is large or is a bad plague, and you fear that those accidents may happen again, and you feel pain in that place, do not cover it with stars, but wrap it with hard wraps instead of stars, and tighten it well.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And when the wound begins to hurt again after one or two days, let it dry, then remove the wrap you had placed on it, and apply heat to that place, according to our custom, which is that we treat plagues with heat, thus applying a four-fold mixture and poultice.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	And you should remove the splint and consider the wound every day from morning until evening before it is consolidated and closed, and cover the member in such a way that the corrosion runs away from it to the parts.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If the wound takes more than a few days to heal and is not closed or the bracelet is broken, then you will know that this is a sign of trouble, so be careful.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And of those injuries that separate themselves and extrude, those that are not separated and place the member in such a way that they cause pain, pierce yourself to cut them out according to what is possible.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	And if the wound is infected with pus or putrefaction, then it is a sign of bad omen, so cover yourself to prevent such things from happening again as those that are mentioned in his chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o .xxx.; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And from this place, where you should put your hand on yourself: when it is swollen, apply heat to the member as well as the bones of the thigh and support, and do not be afraid of the removal, for a strong force can break it after about twenty days or so; leave it inside that it may heal. Then heal the wound if it is visible, and if not, leave it.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	Of the treatment of a broken bone that occurs at the site of a fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	This treatment occurs at the site of healing a fracture, mostly when it is near the joints, and it disturbs the member's natural operation.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Then consider if the injury is recent and apply those medicines that have been described above, as well as washing, and see, and search for, and smell, and touch, and wrap them in a cloth, and tighten them with good restraint.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	Then leave that wrapping in place for a few days; then remove it and apply another one, unless the wound has been inflamed again; or tighten it with a lead plate because lead has the property of keeping all the swelling out of the limbs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if the injury has already become severe and is hardened, it provokes a violent stabbing, then cut it with a sharp knife from its upper most part, and cut off the excess and prominent part, or break it by applying a strong force to it within, so that it heals wherever it can; then heal it.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	Of the restoration of a fracture when it is restored, and then return that member to its natural state.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture is healed, and then return that member to its delicate state, unless it is due to a variety of causes: one is the diversity of solutions for the splint and the connection of it to the body does not match; or because of excess tightness in the splints through which nutrients are prevented from reaching the member; or because of a variety of unnecessary treatments; or because of excessive movement at inappropriate times; or because of a lack of rest for the body.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	And the treatment of that is to feed the patient and make his heart happy because the pain multiplies in him; and apply baths, and give a gentle massage, and bring relief to him.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	Then put a cloth on the member, so that the cloth provides nourishment to it, or continue with a shower of water, so that the nutriment runs and returns to its natural figure.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	Of the treatment of broken bones when they are restored with torture, and prohibit the operation of them unless necessary.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When the member is already restored as a result of healing a broken bone and an injury that causes pain in the form of the member, but this member is not prevented from its natural operation, so you should accept the word that this member has been recently broken.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	But many bad symptoms and healing methods have already occurred in our land, and this operation is very painful, causing great fear of the sign that brings death.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	But if the claudication and injury are recent, then consider that they be wrapped in a warm water bath in which herbs with soothing properties are added, as well as leaves of mint and raisin, and honey, applied to it; or that it is coated with a paste made from a herbal infusion, or that it is rubbed with a liniment of gualine or olive oil extracted from chamomile, and wrapped in a cloth; or that it is dressed with dried fig leaves, and similar to those of the medicines that are called dry consolidation.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And sometimes it is dissolved with frequent light friction that is kept moist, and applied at all times.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	But if the torture has already been done in advance, and it is severe and has become a pain that provokes the need for treatment with iron, then consider that the pus above be removed and the continuous bone be dissolved, and insert into it those excesses of injury from that member by means of a very delicate scalpel, and administer ease to it wherever it is needed, and study carefully.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter 23.
De sermo en dislocacio.	Of speech in dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is when any of the joints of the member is displaced from its place, so that it is prevented from moving, and the figure of the member is changed, causing great pain and severe damage.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Then when a dislocation occurs, pierce it so that it is reduced quickly, because if it is delayed, the joint becomes fixed and very difficult to reduce.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And so, it is not necessary to stretch or tighten it at the time of reduction, because this causes spasms and pain.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	Then when it happens to you, consider that you undergo an operation called flaubotomia on the member, and leave it to rest while it is reduced; then wrap the member in warm water and oil, and reduce it easily.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And the whole member be healed with that water, so that the memory of it will return to its place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And I have ordered that the joints be moved according to what is described in the fracture; from the top of the body it comes into the bottom part.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter .xxiiii.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	About the treatment for dislocated jaw: leave it alone.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	If the two jaws are not set back soon after being dislocated, or if they are slightly moved by a little handling and become softened a little; or if they are completely dislocated and fully moved apart, so that they do not close again, nor is there saliva in the mouth, and the tongue is wrapped up with the words.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	But when the dislocation is small, then in the major part of the cases return by themselves for a small cause.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	But if the dislocation is whole and complete, then cover that it may be administered with a little reduction, and not be delayed at all.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the minister has the head of the patient, and inserts his hand into his throat at the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, if the dislocation is from one side; or that he inserts both hands together, if the dislocation is from two sides, and the other parts of him are apart; and orders the patient to cease moving his jaws and to place them back in their places; and the doctor makes the jaw fit and closes it.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	But if the reduction is difficult, and more so if both jaws are completely dislocated, then administer a vapour of water and oil, so that the reduction of both be made a little and not be delayed at all in making the reduction of both, as I have said above.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And so, when they return and are closed up together, and the mouth of the patient is not softened, then put a cloth on those parts, and make it with wax and oil rolled up; and then let it be held in place with ease by means of soft ligatures.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And let the patient lie on his back, and the head between two pillows, so that he does not spit out at right or left; and do not force him to swallow anything; have his own food, but when the pains return and the jaws are closed, then give him what he wants to drink.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And this water should be administered with ease, and not work on the mouth's opening while eating, drinking, and swallowing, so that the jaw is closed and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if the reduction of both jaws is difficult when they are completely dislocated at any time, and do not return to their places, then very often fever and soda will happen, and a strong belching from the patient's belly, and a strong vomiting of pure cholera will occur.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you see water, then know that it is a waste; and very often the patient dies within ten days from the time he drank water.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter.xxv.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	About the reduction of the dislocation of the furchetta and the end of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The furchetta is not dislocated from the body at its base because of the continuity with the foot; and some are dislocated from the outside part, and water is used to this end.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And the restoration is that the patient jumps on his back and spreads his legs.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	Then put the place on the palm of your hand with a strong grip, because it will return.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And then place over that plaster and dust, and tighten it up.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	But the end of that muscle which seizes you is not dislocated in any day; then it is reduced and closed up as I have said, and according to your costume.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And then place over that plaster, and dust, and tighten up, and order the patient to stay quiet and at rest until it is healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And in this cure for the shoulder joint, the end of the muscle is separated from its place when reduced.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter.xxvi.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	About the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	Know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways; and one of them is dislocated at the top of the rib, at the top part.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is that it is dislocated at the bottom part of the rib muscle, and this should not be done; nor is it dislocated from behind by the shoulder, nor from in front by the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And most often it is dislocated and comes out at the bottom part of the rib, and most often in those parts where the meat is small, it is slightly dislocated; but in those where there is a lot of meat, it comes out with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And very often, in some people, there is a pounding or a shock; and the muscle of the patient is bruised with a bruise, and it is known that it has been dislocated by water that has already been dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Then you should wait until you are no longer wet from it, and then proceed with the treatment of the patient.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	It is known that the dislocation of the patient is when he is at the bottom part of the rib; but so that you can distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the other, because there is a great difference between them; and it is known that the top of the rib is concav to the side, and the top of the rib is touched with the head in such a way that one can put his hand on it, and the patient cannot reduce it back into its place at his ear, nor can he move it at all.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is dislocated from the foot or from the leg, then you should feel a clear touch; and do not cover it up.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And of this dislocation there is a little reduction when it is fresh and the patient does not eat.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction of the patient is that the minister raises his hand up to the top part of it; then he puts the strings on each side of the rib of the patient, and tightens them with strength towards their place, and the minister raises the patient's hand up, and spreads it out; and then he puts those strings aside because they return slightly.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	But if by water that I have said does not return, and only from the beginning of the dislocation; then the patient is bathed in cold water and given a massage to soften it and relax it, as if his joints were being moved by a warm oil; and fenugrec, and meletum in water, is administered.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	And the patient should be raised on his back and be placed with his legs apart in such a way that the ends of the rib are suspended by themselves; and the doctor places his hand on the top part of the rib, and raises it towards its place, and the other minister holds the head so that it is not moved to the outside, because that returns quickly.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you want to, reduce it in this way: and it is known that you should have been present with a man who was longer than the patient, and stand on the same side of him; and insert his hand into the bottom part of the rib of the patient, and raise it up towards its place while the patient remains suspended in the air, and the other minister holds the patient' head so that it does not move to the outside, because that returns quickly.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	But if the patient is weak, then know that he may be suspended by himself because of another cause; for the dislocation returns quickly.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And if it is necessary to make incisions on the surface of the body, then do so with a sharp knife, not too thick or thin, and place them on the patient's thigh; because they are placed on top of the thigh, the leg should be positioned according to the length of the thigh, and the hand should be extended to the cuts on one side of the leg while the other side is held firm, for the joint returns to its position quickly.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if it is difficult to reduce the patient for any of the reasons mentioned above, then use this cure: and that you take a long pole whose length is two brazen staff, and whose width is four fingers, and whose thickness is lessened at the end that fits into the hole according to this shape:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And place the round end of the pole on top of the thigh, with lions' claws so that the pole does not slide off the thigh.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And place it on the patient's thigh below the knuckle, and extend the arm or hand above the pole where it is joined to the other part, and tie the pole firmly onto the assistant and arm and the end of the hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	Then place the arm on a step according to its width, and extend the hand at one end, and suspend the other side because the joint enters so quickly.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the patient's joint is completely relaxed according to each of the ways that are possible for you, and then cover it with a large quantity of wool; then place a plaster made from flour and egg white on top of the muscle, so that it is turned over itself, and then tighten it at the knuckle with a strap; and let the joint be turned over the plaster, and the hand be connected to its neck, and let it not be moved for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And when the patient' hand is rested enough so that the member is comfortable, because it becomes easier to heal it.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	Then give them more food after seven days or less, and exercise the movement; and if it does not soften and become easier, then it is healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	If the joint is dislocated due to moisture that occurs on it or for any other reason, then according to what has been said in the chapter on cauterization, three caustic substances should be used:
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if it still does not heal and has been seven days since the dislocation, then a few spots of caustic substance should be applied to it, and if that does not work, and the joint does not become stiff and firm again, then you will know that the nerves in it, which are at the end of the muscle, have split or stretched out or softened, and you will know that the joint will never heal in its place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	From the dislocation of that hand or leg, the reduction should be done with a sudden and swift movement towards the body, while returning to its position should be slow and gentle.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And the other constraint should be applied to it, and that cure should be used until it is healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if there is a heavy burden on the member and delay in its movement, then the patient should use bathwater that has been heated to ease the burden and restore the member's natural function first.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	On the Treatment of a Dislocated Shoulder
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	You should know that the shoulder joint is dislocated with great difficulty and seems to return with great difficulty; and it is dislocated at both ends, mainly at the front and back, and when the dislocated shoulder is adjusted with the hand's movement, it is clearly stated that the joint is convex and cannot bend the arm or touch it to its muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And if you have these symptoms, then reduce the dislocation as soon as possible because, if it goes to the shoulder joint, difficult is its reduction, and fort it does not heal completely; and more so when it is at the back because there are many types of shoulder dislocations, and they cause great pain, and some of them give death quickly.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And the restoration of it, when that is possible to reduce, is that the hand be extended with two arms, and the muscles be spread out, and the other side be placed on top of the shoulder, and let it press the joint with the back of the hand, or with the palm, so that it returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	If the dislocation is at the front end, then return it so that it bends at the wrist with the palm facing itself.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not obey the reduction, then administer violent heat quickly and strongly.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And that two ministers extend their arms, and have this extension of two ministers so that it is not shaken by the heat.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	Then turn the arms around completely, because it is wrapped in a long cloth over the hand, or limb.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the hand touches the joint with its palm, oil it with some oil to help it move easily; and immediately press the joint with a violent push so that it returns to its place.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	Then the reduction of it should be done on top of a paste that is stiffened with egg white, and stretched with salt, and let it be suspended from its neck, and left alone for several days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	Then it should be relaxed; and if the joint returns to its place, then you release the member from its body, and leave it alone.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see that the joint is not strong, then you repeat the paste and member release, and leave it alone for several days before stretching again; and then release it.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	If there is a heavy burden on the reduction of the joint and its movement, then administer bathwater with friction and compression, but make it lighter; or pause over the joint and let it rest, and leave it alone for the day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	Then wrap the member in a bath; and when it is hot, then you rub the joint with gentle friction, and immediately repeat the rubbing on top of the joint so that it rubs, and the third time,
corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denolam intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	Corruption has already begun to spread on the denuded flesh inside the bath, but it is limited.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you wish, pause over that cow's hide that is wet and scraped with the edge, and rub it gently; because that hide is wet and you restore its movement.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	On the Treatment of a Dislocated Shoulder (continued).
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	A few veins of the hand are dislocated, and the reduction of it is light, but the opposite is true for other joints; however, it is important to know that the speed of reducing a dislocated joint in an hour when it is separated from its place is faster than when it occurs within the caustic substance.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the reduction of the dislocated joint is that you place the knuckle of the hand on a table and have a minister extend the hand, and have the other side placed on top of its joint, or hold it near the joint, and press it with the palm so that it returns to its place.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	However, it is important to consider if the palm is already showing when the hand is closed; then place the two hands on a table before extending and reducing; and if the dislocation occurs previously, then have the two hands placed on top of each other, and let the knuckles meet with the palms; and if the dislocation occurred later, then place the two hands on the table, so that the knuckles of one hand are against the palm of the other.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And therefore, if you return soon, it is good; but if not, then wait for him to be well-healed and healed; and do not do this again, because unless he suffers or can no longer tolerate the reduction of his hernia, more days will pass without improvement.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	But the Roman joint is second to its tortuosity; and there is no cause for the patient, except that his hand is swollen and cannot be tightened for any reason; therefore you know that the nerves are twisted or torn, and do not press them in one place because they will tighten again, and give them some strength.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	Therefore, if you have returned to health, then pause on the patch that we have removed and let it heal and get stronger over a few days; and then remove it again and exercise his hand.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	But if his movement remains stiff and occurs in the hand some pain or discomfort; then gently rub it with water and some oil, until it is relieved.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	On the treatment of dislocations.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Some injuries may be dislocated at first.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when a digit is dislocated at the first joint of the hand or foot, then tighten it and push the dislocation back into place, unless it returns on its own.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	And then support the tip of the finger, and suspend that part in which it is dislocated, and leave it for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	Then hang it up and stretch it out until the third day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when night comes, let him lie in that position according to the previous description, and do not stop removing it on the third day and exercising his hand, and let him sleep at night; and make him strict for a few days until he is well.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And make him similar to himself, if it is dislocated at the base of the hand, and let him lie on that side, and perform the first operation on his digit, unless he is healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And make him similar to himself when it is dislocated at other joints.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	On the treatment of dislocations of the spine on the arm.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When a complete dislocation of the spine on the arm or neck occurs, and the bones come out of their places, then there is no cure for this, because death comes to the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	And this is the reason that the vomit of the patient is outside his will, and he cannot hold it back; and some limbs of him or two legs or two arms of him become soft, because bones are broken in four places; and the dislocation of them to four parts is accomplished.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Therefore that person has been dislocated at the back joints and is called gelbosity.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	But the treatment of him is that you should consider if the gelbosity occurs from youth, because there is no cure or remedy for it in general.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	But in that person who has been dislocated by a sudden blow or by a fall or by chance to those, the ancient doctors have said many methods of treatment with long speech, of which the least returns and is renewed by me from another instrument, with which I have treated him and made him well.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	I say that in gelbosity that occurs from dislocation at the front of the foot, there is no cure or remedy for it; and by analogy with that which occurs at the back.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And of those, there is no cure except that which occurs in the hand, which I have removed.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And that the patient lie on his face with his head turned to one side, and be extended on the other side of him an instrument wet with water so that it does not rub against his feet.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	Then place a firm stick under his head, fixed in the ground at the end of the foot where it turns, and another under his feet at the other end of the foot;
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	And the minister hold one stick, and does not put it in a hole; and the other minister holds the other according to that form.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	Then wrap his head in a cloth and tie it securely; then extend the end of the limb that is at the top of the stick, which supports his head, and let him lie on it; and then adjust all the limbs and let them lie on the other stick, which should support his feet.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	Then the minister drops one limb at the end of the stick, and does not lock the two sticks and limbs in their places; but they should be left loose in this way, as we have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the doctor should place his palms on the spine with strength until it returns to its place, or on a table, and should adjust his feet on the table until it returns to its place.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	But if it does not return in this way, then find a table whose length or width is at an angle of three bras to one side from where the patient lies; and dig into the wall on that side at which end of the table.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	Then the minister should place the table's leg on the spine, and the doctor his feet on the other end; then he should adjust himself so that the spine is held in its place, and let him return to his place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you wish, open the trap which is rolled up at the feet; and it should be that you lie on your back with your head at the end of two sticks, whose length is a palm, and your feet at the other end; and make the length between each stick a palm, and already it has been made in such a way that when one runs down it turns, and the other is held firm on the ground so that it does not roll.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And let there be a round stick in which is the trap, and it is rolled up in the two traps of the two sticks;
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at the end of him is a trap in which the stick is rolled up, whose length is a palm with which it is rolled up; and in the other two sticks is the same as this one.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	Then adjust the limbs that you have tightened in the feet of the patient on the trap in which the head should lie, and adjust the limbs that you have tightened on the legs of the patient on the table in which the feet should lie; and make those same adjustments as these ones.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	Then it is right that each trap should be opened and a minister twist the trap with his hand, and the doctor tighten the spine as we have said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	This is the form of the trap:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	Then when the spine has returned to its place and is wrapped up, then put on a dry cloth on the table with a hole in which you can put your foot; then cover it over with an oil cloth and make it firm. And if it is necessary to return the limb to its place, then do so; and let him lie on that side where the gelbosity occurred.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	Then make him use the limb that we have said, and give him subtle food to eat until he is well.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if there is some urgency in the place at the end of the cure, then make him take medicines that moilify and soften by long time, which we have recommended; and already it has been administered in that place a plate of lead.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And in some cases there is imminent danger at the rear of the two vertebrae, and that is caused by dislocation; and that is the bone which I have already touched so that it does not come to be done prosompcion to him with this medicine because it will fort make you to happen death.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter .xxxi.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	Of the treatment of a dislocated hip.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	Do you know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle do not occur except by dislocation so much, and do not happen to those water that happen to other joints with little movement and concave.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the joint of the hip is dislocated in four ways, because it is dislocated inwardly, or outwardly, or forward, or backward.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And most often it is dislocated inwardly, and less so forward or backward.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	And the sign of a hip dislocation inwardly is that when you adjust the curve of the hip to the hip, it is longer and the back is more curved than before, and the hip cannot bend the leg without pain, and this is the place that stops the pain from stopping suddenly so that the top of the thigh has already come here.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	And the sign of one who has a dislocation outwardly is that the accidents of him are opposite to this accident.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	And the sign of one who has a dislocation backward is that he expands his own curve according to suit, but above all he does not bend that part which hurts him behind, and if he tries to walk on it, his urine is repressed and his limb becomes swollen, and he must walk with a stick.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	And the sign of one who has a dislocation backward is that he does not expand the back, nor can he bend that part in front which bends the hip, and his curve is shorter than the other, and the swelling of his limb is softened, and the top of the thigh has already come to this place.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	But the reduction of this dislocation is that you consider, then, if the dislocation is old and ancient, so it is already advanced with age; therefore, administer to him a reduction of it according to his disposition, then it does not come to be done prosompcion.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	But in that one of the dislocation is recent and is one of the four species of dislocation, then you should cut off to water that turns the joint and extends it to the inside and outside, and makes it turn to the right and left, because it easily returns and does not require another cure.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	But, if it does not return in this way, then you must prepare a strong medicine and extend the curve of him from behind, or against his back, or against his chest, and another minister extends the hand of him above the instep that he touches his foot; and another minister tightens the ligament under the sole of his foot, and another minister tightens the ligature on the root of the thigh, and holds it so that it does not slip.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And it should be cut off from him or from the inside to the joint of the hip, or from behind to the joint of the two;
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And this cutting off should be done in one way, so that the hip is raised to the ground and that it hangs down by its rope.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	This species of cutting off is specific to all four.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And therefore if the dislocation returns to the water that we have mentioned, it is good; but if not, then all species are necessary water in the treatment of itself.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the self-reduction of himself when dislocated, and if the dislocation is inwardly, then the hip should be placed on its back; and place the ligatures over the root of the thigh in that place between the top of the thigh and the place where it hurts to touch it; and extend the ligature above the joint of the hip, or below the joint of the two.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And another minister should hold his legs firmly, and squeeze the large part of the hip with a violent hand, and extend it outwardly by an abrupt movement, because that one returns to its place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this species is the lightest treatment with which this limb can be reduced, better than with any of the other species.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	But if you do not obey this treatment with this species of the treatment of all, then you should tie both feet of him together with a strong ligature, softly, on the toes and on the backs.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And be the length of each one with the quantity of four fingers, and let the hip curve be extended more than the other by the quantity of two fingers.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And the hip should be suspended on its head and be in the middle; and be the length of him from the ground the quantity of two bras.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And command a strong youth to cut the top of the thigh, and another youth should hang the hip from him, and the other youth should cut the thigh with a quick movement, because the joint returns to its place with speed.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	But in the self-reduction when it is dislocated outwardly, then the hip should rest on the ground according to what we have said, and that it be held by its rope; and the ligature should be tightened on the curve of him, specifically and on his feet.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And two poles should be placed, the one under his feet and the other on his head; and two poles should be raised up, one in front of him and the other behind him; and the two poles should be raised up so that the hip does not slip by them, because the extension to the inside is not pulled.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And each minister should extend in its part, and the medicine should drink it according to art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Therefore, if you obey in reverse, it is good very much; but if not, then stop immediately and thus we have said to hold fast.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	But the hip should be resting on its own feet quietly.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is forward, then the curve should be extended slightly, and this is according to this story about a tree; and the medicine stops his palm from touching his hip, and immediately cuts it with the other palm, and extends it to the inside of the hip to the outside.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	And if the dislocation is backward, then you should not extend the hip to the inside, but it is raised up by its own feet on the ground; and as soon as it stops from touching a hard thing, then, according to what we have said about the extension of his hips over two large beams, and that is under its face and the ligatures are extended.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And that compression should be administered to him on a table in the place where he feels the joint.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	And the end of the reduction is that he does not turn away from you, but that you extend two beams to him, and when you see those rope and the hip expands its back slightly, then you should know that the other limb has returned; and you should tie him to rest for three days or four.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	And take off the ligature and the bandage, and compare the one curve to the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	Then, if you see those knees in their place, know that the dislocation is already closed, and let them go.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any cause of softening, then turn back and put that in place, and take out that second one according to your first stretch, and leave it for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	Then remove that, and let that one walk a little late for a few days until he is comfortable.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	Of treatment of dislocation from the knie
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The dislocation is dislocated according to three ways, because it is dislocated at the outside joints, and at the inside joints, and at the joints of the sides more towards the outside joints, but not dislocated at the front joints.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of dislocation from him is that you command the patient to apply his chest to the cushion; then you will know that the dislocation has occurred.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of all his ways is that you make him extend his chest, and then, if he can stand on it; place his feet under his hips, and then make him adhere his knees to his chest, and make them press against his chest; and another minister extends his feet within so that the dislocated one returns to his place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And the sign of recovery from him is that his chest adheres to the cushion without effort.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Then return it and make the chest adhere to the cushion, then tie them up with a cloth for three days or four, then remove them.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not use the patient for walking for a few days until he is healed and comfortable.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	But if his reduction to you is prevented, then administer firmly with the joint of his foot in the treatment of the hand preceding the narrative.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	Of the treatment of dislocation from the head.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The head sometimes gets up again by little movement, and sometimes is dislocated completely, and the dislocation is made either at the inside joints or at the outside joints.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the sign of dislocation from him is that the head swells up according to the joint in which it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	But the treatment of movement from him is of light recovery, and it is done with ease according to his hand, and then he is put back in place so that he returns.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	But in the treatment of him when he is dislocated completely, cover that you make the patient extend his right leg, and have another minister hold the joint from behind at the place of his head.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	Then turn to him towards the right hand with the leg of the uppermost part, and towards your left hand with the leg of the lowermost part in its cavity.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	Then turn his feet to you with the right hand, and then with the left for two turns, and then extend them with the left; and put the feet of the foot on the right side with the chest at work.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	Then make him turn twice as you have counted.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	Then extend his feet to the chest on the third turn, and you are in its cavity.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	Then return him once or twice in this way, and if the foot swells up, it is good; but if not, then repeat the operation, for it will return.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	But if you are prohibited from reducing the patient by water which we have mentioned, then make the servant walk on his two feet on the earth, and place a cloth between the knees of the patient, and wrap him in a blanket to prevent him from slipping.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	Then the servant of him holds his knees, and another minister extends his feet towards his heels or towards a cloth stretched over the top of his foot; and then extend those of the minister against the extension of his own hand, and make the cloth be extended between the knees of the patient to prevent him from slipping; and make the servant walk on his two feet so that his knees do not touch his heels.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	Then the doctor swallows up the dislocation with his hand, and another minister holds the knee at the sides, because the dislocation returns easily.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And so when the dislocation returns and is declared to you the health of the reduction from him, then stop applying the paste and take out that with a strong joint, and bind his feet to the chest.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	But if you fear or keep yourself from the nerves which are behind on the head, that the joint over it is not violent and it is held fast firmly.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	Then leave him alone for two days or three; and if the joint softens, take out that one.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	Then remove that one on the third day or the fourth, and prohibit the patient from walking for ten days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	But if it is necessary to walk in front of that space, it is not necessary that the dislocation should be over him dissolved and corrupted, and then apply treatment.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if he swells up with a fever after you have administered him in the treatment of dislocation from him which preceded the narrative, in another place of treatment and remedy, so that it gets well again.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	Of treatment of dislocation of the feet.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	But if that which is dislocated is put back in place by little movement, and it is not difficult to walk forward a little.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	But if the dislocation is in one of the two feet, then cover that you make the patient extend his right leg on a bench or table, and let him walk as if he were walking alone.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	Then turn the feet to you with the right hand, and then with the left, and then extend them with the left; and then put them back in their places so that they do not appear in the same way again.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	Then place the navel of his foot on a table which is turned towards him with both feet, and then extend them with the left hand, and then put them back in their places so that they do not appear in the same way again; and then leave him alone for three days; and then remove that one and make it rest for four days before walking, so that it does not fall and its recovery is assured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	Of the types of dislocation which are caused by water or by fracture or by some other cause.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When any cause of those occurs, and you are engaged in the treatment of that person and his recovery, then you will see success many times.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And do not think that the treatment of him is to boast about; but go out with mildness and mercy, and put up a little at first, and then more as needed; and leave the patient to God's judgment, but if you hope for his salvation from harm, then relieve his suffering with kindness, and show him some hope.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	Then strive hard first to reduce him because of the cause, before he becomes sick with fever.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	Then if the member returns as we wish, then administer to him the medicine which causes fever and cure the plague with water which is sent to him by those who have dried it up.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if the dislocation is caused by fracture and the bones are separated, then you strive to mend them, and make them fit into place in this water which has been mentioned before in the places of those.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	Here is the translation of the text:
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Thus ends the words of Al-Bucasia perfectly as to which God is pleased.
Amen.	A messiess que sien per tu servat la tua saucell, e mays le vostri cos servass a Dios in saucells, e in saucells de la saucell.
